File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 1 ---
USAF WARRIOR STUDIES

Richard H. Kohn and Joseph P. Harahan
General Editors

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 2 ---
USAF WARRIOR STUDIES

Air Superiority in World War II and Korea, edited by Richard H.

Kohn and Joseph P. Harahan, 1983
GPO Stock # 008-070-0489-5

The Command of the Air, by Guilio Douhet, New Imprint, 1983
GPO Stock # 008-070-0505-1

Condensed Analysis of the Ninth Air Force in the European Theater of

Operations, 1984
GPO Stock # 008-070-0513-1

The Literature of Aeronautics, Astronautics, and Air Power, by Richard

P. Hallion, 1984
GPO Stock + 008-070-0523-9

Over the Hump, by William H. Tunner, New Imprint, 1985

Available to Air Force agencies only from the Office of Air Force History

Air Interdiction in World War II, Korea, and Vietnam, edited by

Richard H. Kohn and Joseph P. Harahan, 1986
GPO Stock # 008-070-00571-9

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
Washington, D.C. 20402

KFmmee ss rn,

~ bas]

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 3 ---
THE STRATEGIC AIR WAR
AGAINST GERMANY AND JAPAN:
A MEMOIR

Haywood S. Hansell, Jr.
Major General, USAF, Retired

OFFICE OF AIR FORCE HISTORY
UNITED STATES AIR FORCE
WASHINGTON, D.C., 1986

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 4 ---
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Hansell, Haywood S.
The strategic air war against Germany and Japan.

(USAF warrior studies)

Bibliography: p. 295

Includes index.

1. Hansell, Haywood S. 2. World War, 1939-1945-—
Aerial operations, American. 3. Japan—History—Bom-
bardment, 1944-1945. 4. Germany—History—Bombard-
ment, 1940-1945. 5. World War, 1939-1945—Personal
narratives, American. 6. Strategy. 7. Japan—Strategic
aspects. 8. Germany—Strategic aspects. I. Title. II.
Series.

D790.H264 1986 940.54°4973’0924 [B] 86-23749
ISBN 0-912799-39-0

Project Warrior Studies are published by the Office of Air Force
History. The views expressed in this publication are those of the
author, and do not necessarily reflect the policies of the United States
Air Force or the Department of Defense.

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402

iv

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 5 ---
Foreword

The Strategic Air War Against Germany and Japan is part of a
continuing series of historical volumes produced by the Office of Air
Force History in direct support of Project Warrior. Since its
beginnings in 1982, Project Warrior has captured the imagination of
Air Force people around the world and reawakened a keener
appreciation of our fundamental purpose as a Service: to deter war,
but to be prepared to fight and win should deterrence fail.

Military history helps provide a realistic perspective on warfare.
Through the study of past events, we gain insight into the capabilities
of armed forces and, most importantly, a sound knowledge of the
policies, strategies, tactics, doctrine, leadership, and weapons that have
produced success in battle. Each of us, in broadening our knowledge of
air power’s past, helps to maintain the most effective Air Force
possible, now and in the future.

LARRY D. WELCH, General, USAF
Chief of Staff

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 6 ---
United States Air Force

Historical Advisory Committee
(As of January 1, 1986)

Mr. DeWitt S. Copp
The Voice of America

Dr. Phillip A. Crowl
Annapolis, Maryland

Dr. Warren W. Hassler, Jr.
Pennsylvania State University

Brig. Gen. Harris B. Hull
USAF, Retired

National Aeronautics and
Space Administration

Dr. Alfred F. Hurley (Chairman)
Brig. Gen., USAF, Retired
North Texas State University

Dr. Haskell M. Monroe, Jr.
University of Texas at El Paso

Lt. Gen. Thomas C. Richards,
USAF
Commander, Air University

Gen. Thomas M. Ryan, Jr.
USAF, Retired

Lt. Gen. Winfield W. Scott, Jr.
USAF
Superintendent, USAF Academy

Mr. Eugene R. Sullivan
The General Counsel, USAF

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 7 ---
Preface

The history of American air power is very short indeed. Military
and naval histories span thousands of years. Military aviation history
is encompassed in the lifetime of a single individual. The birth of
powered flight is coincident with my own. In 1912 I got my first
glimpse of an airplane. I was standing on the fairgrounds of the annual
carnival in Manila, Philippine Islands, when a biplane beat its slow
pace across the sky. An aged Filipino standing nearby said, in
astonishment, “jMuy grande pollo!” or “Very large chicken!’ As a boy
of nine I was in full agreement.

I mention this only to make a point. Military conflict on land and
sea has been exhaustively reported and analyzed for centuries. The
processes are well understood. The general principles have been
distilled and tested. The experience and history of air war are in their
infancy. They are measured in a few decades, actually in the span of
my own lifetime. There has been only one major conflict involving
application of air power on a grand scale. And yet that air experience
has had a profound impact upon war, and upon nations in competition
and conflict short of major war. The impact of space power has no
history at all, but that impact may be even greater than the impact of
atmospheric air power. There is dispute over the relative merits of
historical experience and of abstract logic in the development of
effective combat forces. Military aviation strategists must make the
best of very limited historical experience and derive requirements
based upon logic and forecast.

This book seeks to recount the air experience and development

vii

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 8 ---
before World War II, to describe the objectives, plans and effects of
strategic air warfare in Europe and in the Pacific, and to offer
criticism, opinion, and lessons of that great conflict.

In retrospect I find that I have been singularly fortunate in my
associations and assignments. I have been associated with many great
men and have been in position to observe great events. In the decade
before World War II, I had a priceless opportunity to work with Bob
Olds, Harold Lee George, Ken Walker, Don Wilson, and Muir
“Santy” Fairchild, under the guidance, inspiration, and benign
protection of the Commandant of the Air Corps Tactical School at
Maxwell Field, Col. John F. Curry. My associates also included Ira C.
Eaker, who combined great ability as a staff executive with superlative
leadership as Commanding General of the Eighth Air Force in
England. I worked under that superb airman, Carl ‘“Tooey” Spaatz,
Commanding General, United States Strategic Air Forces in Europe. I
was caught up in the dedication and driving spirit of Henry H. “Hap”
Arnold, Commanding General, U.S. Army Air Forces, Air Member of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Commanding General, Twentieth Air
Force. And I had the special privilege of working for the greatest
soldier of our day, and perhaps of any day, a man of superb integrity
and highest character: Army Chief of Staff Gen. George Catlett
Marshall.

The observations contained in this book constitute a memoir, with
all the shortcomings of faulty memory, bias, personal viewpoint,
personal experience, and inadequate research that are implied in the
term. They lead to speculation on probable results of alternative
actions or conditions, and that speculation is likewise suspect because
it reflects personal judgment. But the compendium may lead others to
derive lessons and conclusions which fit into a broader mosaic.

Vili

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 9 ---
This work does not, of course, aspire to the dignity of “history.”
Participants are notoriously poor historical observers. Participation
induces bias. But there should be some limited value to the viewpoint
of participants—if their opinions are properly screened to eliminate
prejudice. After all, there is some virtue in the observation of the poet
who wrote:

The experts sit in serried rows

And fill the Plaza Toros full.

But only one there is who knows
And he’s the one who fights the bull.

These memoirs will not earn the “bull’s ear,” but the perspective
is that of an aged matador.

Haywood S. Hansell, Jr.
Hilton Head, South Carolina

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 10 ---
Acknowledgments

Since this is a personal memoir, I acknowledge my indebtedness
on two scores: to those who shaped the perspective through which I
viewed the events described in this book; and to those who helped in
the preparation of the book itself.

My perspective and outlook were deeply influenced by my first
commanding officer, Maj. Gen. Hugh J. Knerr, who prior to the war
served with the 2d Bombardment Group at Langley Field. He
impressed me as a dynamic and charismatic leader who imbued his
outfit with his own integrity, devotion, and patriotic loyalty to the Air
Corps. I owe a debt of admiration to Brig. Gen. Kenneth N. Walker
for his enthusiasm and his faith in bombardment; to Lt. Gen. Harold
L. George, whose perceptive prewar inquiry into the basic purpose and
nature of strategic air warfare colored my outlook for the rest of my
military career; to Maj. Gen. Donald Wilson for his method of logical
research into fundamental target systems; to Gen. Muir S. Fairchild
for his thoughtful approach to and appraisal of military philosophy,
particularly as it pertains to strategic air warfare; to Gen. Ira C. Eaker
for his dedication to performance as Executive to Gen. Henry H.
Arnold, and as Commanding General, Eighth Air Force, for his
courage and steadfastness of character in the harrowing first years of
the great trial of the Eighth Air Force in combat. His dedication to the
Air Force knows no equal. My outlook upon strategic planning and
the conduct of air warfare was influenced by my service under Gen.
Carl “Tooey” Spaatz and my admiration for his example of calm,
courageous common sense and good judgment. And, I pay tribute to

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 11 ---
two great commanders for whom I worked and whose achievements—
through signally different methods—I came to admire: General of the
Army George C. Marshall, the epitome of integrity and cool
dedication; and General of the Army Air Forces Henry H. Arnold,
whose dynamism drove men to accomplish the impossible in the
creation of the United States Air Force. All of these people influenced
my military perspective and formed my military outlook.

The creation of the book itself benefited from many who helped,
offered criticism, edited, and corrected the text. My gratitude to Maj.
Gen. Cecil E. Combs knows no bounds. He offered intelligent and
constructive criticism coupled with encouragement. His observations
and contributions were well founded; he was an active participant in
most of the events recorded in this memoir.

And I offer my thanks and acknowledgments to Lt. Gen.
Raymond B. Furlong, USAF, Ret., former Air University
Commander, and Col. Thomas A. Fabyanic, USAF, Ret., former
Chief, Military Studies Division, Air War College, without whose
enthusiastic support my previous books The Air Plan That Defeated
Hitler and Strategic Air War Against Japan, on which this memoir is
based, would probably not have been published. I especially appreciate
the assistance of a very special scholar, Dr. Robert F. Futrell, a gifted
professional historian who participated in the air war in the Pacific.
His acknowledged scholarship and willingness to edit and review this
manuscript have eliminated lingering fears of some gross error on my
part.

The present form of the memoir is a compendium of the books
mentioned above. This memoir has profited greatly from the talent
and skill of Dr. Richard H. Kohn, Chief, Office of Air Force History;
Col. John F. Shiner, Deputy Chief; and Dr. Joseph P. Harahan,

xi

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 12 ---
Historian, USAF, who consolidated, rearranged, and improved the
sequential presentation of this book. Mr. Eugene P. Sagstetter, Office
of Air Force History, edited the final manuscript; Mr. Ray Del Villar,
USAF Directorate of Administration, Publishing Division, assisted
with maps and charts; and Sgt. Glenn B. Reynolds, USAF, typed the
final manuscript. Ms. Anne E. Johnson, Office of Air Force History,
designed the volume and guided it through the publication process.

I also acknowledge my indebtedness to Mr. Robert T. Finney and
Mrs. Irene P. Barnett of the Air University for editing an early edition
of this manuscript. Mrs. Barnett gave of her talents so thoroughly that
I feel she is better acquainted with this memoir than its author.

Finally, I express my gratitude to the editors of Air University
Review for permission to use extracts from my articles which it has
published, and to the editors of Air Force Magazine for permission to
use my article “The Plan that Defeated Hitler,” which appeared in the
July 1980 issue.

xii

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 13 ---
The Author

MAJOR GENERAL HAYWOOD S. HANSELL, JR., USAF
(Retired), is a native of Atlanta, Georgia. A graduate of Georgia
Institute of Technology (1924), he entered the U.S. Army Air Corps in
1928. Trained as a fighter pilot, he flew in the Air Corps Aerobatic
and Demonstration Team (1932) led by Captain Claire Chennault. In
the mid-1930s Hansell specialized in strategic bombardment, teaching
tactics and doctrine at the Air Corps Tactical School from 1935 to
1938. Just prior to World War II, he went to Army Air Forces
Headquarters where he helped draft the fundamental war require-
ments plan for the service. In 1942 he became Commanding General,
Third Bombardment Wing (B-26s), Eighth Air Force, in the Europe-
an Theater. Subsequently General Hansell commanded the First
Bombardment Division (B-17s), Eighth Air Force, and in 1944-45 the
XXI Bomber Command (B-29s), Twentieth Air Force, in the Pacific.
The latter command was one of only two long-range B~29 commands
conducting strategic air warfare against Japan. In 1946 he retired,
suffering from a physical disability. During the Korean War
(1950-53), the Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force recalled him to active
duty, assigning him as Chief, Military Assistance Program Headquar-
ters, USAF, and subsequently as Air Member Review Board, Weap-
ons Systems Evaluation Group, reporting to the Assistant Secretary of
Defense, Research and Development and to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
After four years as a senior program manager and advisor, General
Hansell retired again. He is the author of The Air Plan That Defeated
Hitler (1972) and Strategic Air War Against Japan (1980).

xiii

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 14 ---


File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 15 ---
Contents

FOreWOrd 20.0.0... cece cece ccc cece cc teccccceeecccceceuunnvtnnrenuueenaes
Preface ............cc cece ccc ecceccceeceeucacesceeuvuceeeetsvnceneesees

I. Integrating Strategy, Air Doctrine, and War Plans .......
II. Planning the Strategic Air War for Europe ................
III. Execution and Evaluation ................ccccceseeceesueeuees
IV. Planning the Strategic Air War Against Japan ............
V. Early Operations ................cccceceeceeseeeeeeseueeuecenes
VI. Other Operations 1.0.0.0... ..c ccc ececceceeeeeeeeeesusenseues
VII. Summing Up ........ 0 cece ee eceeeenen en eeeeeeeeeees

Appendix

The German Electric Power Complex as a Target System ....
Cd OS: a

Photographs

Maj. Gen. Haywood S. Hansell, Jr ..............c cece eee eeeeeeeees
Robert Olds; Donald Wilson; Muir Fairchild; Harold L. George ..

XV

Page

Vii

43
83
135
175
205
259

275
287
295
297

XViil

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 16 ---
Col. John F. Curry; Brig. Gen. William “Billy” Mitchell ........
Bomb damage to the ball-bearing factories at Schweinfurt,
GerMAaNy ....... cece cece cece cece cece eee ence eee eeeeeteeeeeeeees
Maj. Gen. Henry H. Arnold meets with his war planning staff,
ca. fall 1941; Col. Stanley T. Wray, Maj. Gen. George E.
Stratemeyer, and Brig. Gen. Hansell attend a dedication
ceremony at Bassingbourn, England .......................065
Brig. Gen. Hansell listens to Maj. Gen. Follett Bradley,
Chelveston, England, 1943; Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur
Harris meets with Lt. Gen. Frank M. Andrews and Maj.
Gen. Ira C. Eaker, March 1943........... cece cece cece eee
Bomb Loading at an 8th Air Force Base in England—1943
(Courtesy USAF Art Collection) ............. 00. cece eee eeees
Bombing results of the Third Bombardment Division’s mission
over Schweinfurt, Germany, Oct. 14, 1943 ................0..
Brig. Gen. Hansell greets Col. Curtis E. LeMay; a severed
JU-88 at Brunswick, Germany .............. 0... ccc eeee eee e eens
Eighth Air Force bombers strike a ball-bearing factory at
Stuttgart; three American observers examine the ruins of
ball-bearing works at Schweinfurt ................cccceeeeeeees
B-17 Flying Fortresses over Schweinfurt; ruins of Schweinfurt .
The 91st Bomb Group strikes Oschersleben, Germany, on
February 20, 1944.00... cece e eee s een neeeeeeeeneeees
Lt. Gen. Joseph T. McNarney and Gen. Carl Spaatz visit the
381st Bomb Group, April 1944; Lt. Gen. Jacob L. Devers,
Secretary Henry L. Stimson, and Maj. Gen. Ira C. Eaker at
Thurleigh, England, July 1943........... ccc cee cence eee eee
A direct hit at the Musashino aircraft engine plant, on the
outskirts at Tokyo

Xvi

42

66

67

84

87

88

89

90

108

109

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 17 ---
General Arnold and his air staff at the Cairo (Sextant)
Conference of November 1943; Gen. George C. Marshall
and General Arnold meet with the Combined Chiefs of
Staff in Cairo, December 1943 ..............c. ccc ccceeceeceees

Brig. Gen. Hansell briefs pilots before a mission over Tokyo ....

Brig. Gen. Emmett O’Donnell, Jr., Lt. Gen. Millard F.
Harmon, and Brig. Gen. Hansell review strategic bombing
missions; wreckage of Japanese dive bombers lines the
runways in the Marianas, March 1945..................0..085

Ordnance specialists load bombs on a Superfortress on Saipan,
November 1944; bomber crews at the pre-mission briefing
for the XXIst Bomber Command’s first mission to Tokyo,
November 1944 ....... 0. cece cceccec ees eeueeeseeeceeuaenens

A B-29 runs up its engines before taking off on a mission over
Tokyo, December 1944; ground personnel watch a B-29
take off on the first bombing mission from Saipan to
Tokyo, November 1944 ...........cccccccseccecceeeseseeseeeeas

A B-29 flies over the harbor of Saipan; a Superfortress lands on
Saipan after a successful mission against Tokyo .............

Bomb damage at the Musashino aircraft engine plant; Brig.
Gen. Hansell visits with Col. Seth S. Terry...................

Aviation engineers fight fires at Saipan airfiled, November 1944;
a bulldozer moves the burning wreckage ..................005

Bombs burst at the Kawasaki aircraft plant, January 19, 1945 ..

Brig. Gen. Hansell and his XXI Bomber Command staff plan a
mission against Tokyo; heavy bomb damage at the Kawa-
saki aircraft factories, January 1945................0cceeeeeees

XXI Bomber Command leaders: Maj. Gen. Curtis E. LeMay,

xvii

140
176

182

187

188

194

195

196

206

221

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 18 ---
Brig. Gen. Hansell, and Brig. Gen. Roger M. Ramey,

Saipan, January 1945 20.0... ... cee eee cece e eset teen eee enne 230
Superfortresses shower incendiary bombs on Kobe, Japan, June

5, 1945; smoke billows from an industrial section of

Yokohama, Japan, during a daylight raid, May 29, 1945..... 235
Widespread destruction in Yokohama harbor at war’s end; a

Japanese survivor among the ruins of Yokohama ........... 236
Incendiary attacks on Kobe, Japan, June 1945; a Tokyo

survivor drinks from a broken water pipe ................666. 237

Ruins of an oil refinery near Tokyo; damage to a power and
generator plant at Ube, after raids of July and August 1945... 240

A Flight of B-29s, by John McCoy (Courtesy USAF Art
Collection) ...........c ccc cccc eee ene ee eceeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeaeeeeeees 258

Maps and Charts

Planned Air Offensive Against Germany (AWPD-1).......... facing 36
Relationship of Strategic Air Offensive in Planning Grand

Strategy—War in Europe ..............ccceeeeeeeeeee eee eeeees 38
Total Air Force Groups Required ..............:cesceee eee eeeeneens 39
European Campaign—Planned Time Phasing—Victory Pro-

gram; Time Phasing—Actual Campaign ..................64. 118
Total Bomb Tonnage Dropped in the War for Europe ........... 120
Total German Synthetic Fuel Production by Process............. 123
German Explosives Production ...............cccseseseeeeeeeeeueees 124

Net Ton-Kilometers Moved per Month by German Railways,
1944-1945; Tons of Bombs Dropped against German

XViii

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 19 ---
Railways by U.S. Strategic Air Forces and RAF Bomber

Command, 1944-1945 000... 0... ccc ccceccececeseecuseceececues 127
Combat Munitions Production in Germany (U SSBS) ............ 128
Japan and Vicinity ...... 0.0... cece cccccecscecuscecusacsececevencs 145

Pacific War Theater, JCS Pacific Strategy, March 1944...... facing 154
Command, Control, and Support Relationships, Twentieth Air

Force, January 1945 0.0.0... cece ccc ccceccccccucccccccccccccce 155
Japanese Aircraft Industry .......... 00.0... ccceccccececceceseees facing 216
Japan—Monthly Indexes of Aircraft Production, Jan.

1941—July 1945 0. ec cecececececcececasencusasuens 226
Japan and Vicinity, Mission No. 4—315th Bomb Wing—

Maruzen Oil Refinery ...............c.ccccecececcecesecceueees 242
The War against Japan................cccccccecceeceeceeceuseuses facing 250
US Army Air Forces in the Pacific, US Army Strategic Forces

in the Pacific as of 15 August 1945 ..............ccccececeueaes 255

xix

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 20 ---
MAJ. GEN. HAYWOOD S. HANSELL, JR.

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 21 ---
Chapter I

Integrating Strategy,
Air Doctrines, and War Plans

World War II witnessed the first full application of strategic air
power in war. At this writing, in fact, World War II has provided the
only such full-scale application. Because that great effort was unique,
it should be worth analytical examination, not only in terms of actions
and effects, but more particularly in terms of objectives, strategic
plans, and results of operations designed to achieve these ends. A brief
review of the development of U.S. strategic air doctrines and their
nature at the outbreak of American participation in World War II
should serve as a useful prelude to discussion of the strategic air war
itself.*

Air Pioneers

Airplanes were used, of course, in World War I, although on a
very limited scale. But even with the limited use and, for the most part,
inconclusive results of air operations, proponents of air power began to
appear. One of the most notable of these early proponents of the
virtually untried air weapon was Lt. Gen. Jan C. Smuts, who headed a

*For a more detailed account of the origin and development of U.S. strategic air doctrine,
see my The Air Plan That Defeated Hitler (Atlanta, Ga., 1972).

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 22 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

commission established by the British Cabinet to investigate the dual
problems of air organization and home defense. The commission came
into being largely as a result of popular dissatisfaction with the ability
of the air defenses to deal with German Zeppelin and Gotha bombing
attacks against London. The report, submitted to the British Prime
Minister on August 17, 1917, stated:

It is important for the winning of the war that we should not only
secure air predominance, but secure it on a very large scale; and
having secured it in this war, we should make every effort and
sacrifice to maintain it for the future. Air supremacy may in the
long run become as important a factor in the defense of the Empire
as sea supremacy.

Smuts himself said in submitting the report of his commission:

The day may not be far off when aerial operations, with their
devastation of enemy lands and destruction of industrial and
populous centers on a vast scale, may become the principal
operations of war, to which the older forms of military and naval
operations may become secondary and subordinate.

These were strong words regarding the potential of the new air
weapon, coming as early as 1917. Smuts was a ground soldier
speaking, not as one wedded to an historic art, but as a farsighted
statesman. He was characterized by Air Marshal Sir John C. Slessor,
Royal Air Force (RAF), in his memoir, The Central Blue, as “‘one of
the greatest men of our time—of all times.” Significantly, the report of
Smuts’s committee led to the establishment of the Air Ministry in
December 1917 and the Royal Air Force in April 1918. Then, of
course, there was Maj. Gen. Hugh M. Trenchard (later Marshal of the
Royal Air Force Viscount Trenchard), who fended off attacks on the
fledgling RAF by the other services and postulated advanced notions
concerning the possibilities of the air arm.

Support for what we call today “strategic bombardment” came
from other directions as well. For example, as early as 1916 the Italian
aircraft manufacturer Count Giovanni B. Caproni proposed to destroy
German and Austrian naval vessels by bomber attack against fleet

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 23 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

bases. In January 1917, he argued that his large triplane bombers, if
built in sufficient numbers, could destroy Austria’s factories, thus
ending the war with Italy’s main opponent. In October 1917, Caproni,
in collaboration with his friend Lt. Col. Giulio Douhet of the Italian
Army, prepared a “Memorandum on the ‘Air War’ for the U.S. Air
Service,” in which he suggested that mass attacks made at night by
long-range Allied bombers against industrial targets deep within
Germany and Austria could definitely overwhelm the enemy by
substantially reducing his war production at the same time that Allied
production was increasing.

More must be said about Douhet. Actually, he had begun to write
about military aviation as early as 1909. During World War I, he was
imprisoned for a year (1916-1917) for criticizing Italy’s wartime
military policy. But Douhet, like Brig. Gen. William “Billy” Mitchell
of the U.S. Army Air Service, whose career was parallel, became more
influential in the post-World War I period. Douhet’s wartime court-
martial was expunged in 1920, and he was promoted to general officer
rank in 1921. He completed his first serious treatise on military
aviation—Il Dominio dell’ Aria, or The Command of the Air—in
October 1921. In this essay, he proved to be a strong proponent of
strategic air warfare. In essence, he advocated creation of an
independent air force made up of a fleet of bombers, to be accompa-
nied by “battle planes”—bombers equipped with many guns to fight
off hostile pursuit planes en route to strategic targets. This bomber
force would win command of the air by attacking enemy aircraft
factories and flying facilities and would destroy the enemy’s will to
resist by bombing his population centers.

Soon after the end of World War I, airpower concepts were deeply
influenced by two other military strategists. One was the great British
military historian Capt. B. H. Liddell Hart. In his book Paris, Liddell
Hart pointed out that Germany had surrendered when her armies
were still powerful and her borders were still intact. The military
power to wage war was still there but the civilian “will to resist” —to
continue the struggle—had collapsed. Liddell Hart contended that
prosecution of war is a product of two fundamental factors: military

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 24 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

capability and political will to resist or persist. Either or both can be
undermined, with resultant national defeat.

The other military strategist was Billy Mitchell. In the post-World
War I period he was the most outspoken proponent of air power in our
own country. The story of his advocacy of an independent air force
and his insight into the potential of the air weapon has been told and
retold and does not need repeating here. During the war, Mitchell had
been exposed to ideas of other air pioneers, notably Trenchard,
Douhet, and Caproni. He came out of the war convinced that an air
force had a mission independent from the other services and, to be
effective, air power should be concentrated in the hands of airmen.
The extent to which Smuts, Trenchard, Caproni, and Douhet
influenced Mitchell is speculative, but in the post-World War I period
his espousal of a principal role—a war-winning role—for air power is
indisputable.

Mitchell’s ideas concerning air power came cascading in a stream
of publications and public statements. So wide-ranging were his views,
it is difficult to pin them down in one brief quotation. Perhaps,
however, the principal thrust of his arguments was summed up in his
statement before the House Committee on Military Affairs in 1926,
when he declared:

There has never been anything that .. . has changed war the way
the advent of air power has. The method of prosecuting a war in the
old days was to get at the vital centers of the country in order to
paralyze the resistance. This meant the centers of production, the
centers of population, the agricultural districts, the animal industry,
communications—anything that tended to keep up war. Now in
order to keep the enemy out of that, armies were spread in front of
those places and protected them by their flesh and blood. You had
men killing there, sometimes for years before these vital centers
were reached. It led to the theory that the hostile army in the field
was the main objective, which it was. Once having been conquered,
the vital centers could be gotten at .. . In the future, we will strike,
in case of armed conflict, when all other means of settling disputes
have failed, to go straight to the vital centers, the industrial centers,
through the use of an air force and hit them. That is the modern
theory of making war.

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 25 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

War Department Doctrine

While Mitchell advanced ideas on the potential of air power far in
excess of the capabilities of the air weapon of his day, the Army
General Staff continued to be nourished on the time-honored concepts
of warfare, which proclaimed the infantry was the “Queen of Battle.”
Within the War Department, the two decades after World War I were
a period of conflict between the traditionally minded Army members
of the General Staff and a new breed within the Army, the upstart
airmen of the Army Air Corps. The conflict concerned both the place
within the Army for the new air arm and, more specifically, the role of
air power. Gen. John J. Pershing, recently returned from Europe as
head of the victorious American Expeditionary Force and Chief of
Staff of the Army in the early 1920s, threw the weight of his
considerable personal prestige against air power. In fact, airmen might
have been squelched into oblivion if the American public had not
shown an interest in aviation. Public clamor was at least partially
responsible for forcing the government to convene a series of military
and presidential boards and commissions to inquire into the role and
organization of aviation. The reports of these various investigative
agencies played no small role in keeping the question of military
aviation alive.

With one exception, the report of the Lampert Committee, which
in many respects endorsed Mitchell’s ideas, the reports reflected a
general consensus that the air arm could serve a useful purpose as an
adjunct to the Army and Navy. However, there was no place for a
separate air force in the military establishment, and certainly there was
no separate air mission. The prevailing view was summed up in the
July 1934 report of the Baker Board, perhaps the best known of the
various boards. It contended: “Our national defense policy contem-
plates aggression against no nation; it is based entirely upon the
defense of our homeland and our overseas possessions, including
protection of our sea and airborne commerce.” The purpose of the
Army was “to hold an invader while the citizen forces are being
mobilized. . . . The idea that aviation can replace any of the other
elements of our armed forces is found, on analysis, to be erroneous.

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 26 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Since ground forces alone are capable of occupying territory, the
Army with its own air forces remains the ultimate decisive factor in
war.”

Jimmy Doolittle, a member of the Baker Board and an experi-
enced Army aviator, filed a minority dissent. He said, “I believe that
the future security of our Nation is dependent upon an adequate air
force. This is true at the present time and will become increasingly
important as the science of aviation advances and the airplane lends
itself more and more to the art of warfare.” He maintained that a
separate air arm was needed for the proper development and
employment of military aviation.

The issues between the advocates of air power and older services
were clearly drawn. The Army and Navy would only acknowledge the
airplane as a useful auxiliary to the surface forces in the battle to
defeat the enemy. Smuts, Caproni, Douhet, and Mitchell advanced
ideas and concepts that embraced a war-winning potential for air
power and advocated air attacks against “the vital centers, the
industrial centers, the centers of population of the enemy nation,” in
order to destroy the capability and the will of the enemy to continue
the war.

But these visionary concepts of the air pioneers lacked specifics.
How does one go about destroying or paralyzing these vital centers?
Are cities really the best targets? Are there other targets? How should
air power be controlled and employed? What effect is intended and
expected? In short, what strategic and tactical doctrines were needed
to accomplish the ends?

To my knowledge, the Army Air Corps had no official body of
doctrine in the early 1930s. It was a part of the Army. What little
guidance the Air Corps received for the conduct of its operations was
contained in training regulations issued by the War Department. But
these instructions could scarcely be called doctrines for the employ-
ment of air power. While other branches of the Army had boards—the
Infantry Board, the Cavalry Board, the Artillery Board—the Air
Corps had none at the time. In the absence of similar Air Corps
agencies, the Chief of the Air Corps relied upon the Air Corps Tactical
School as a center for producing concepts of airpower employment. So

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 27 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

in reality, the teachings of Air Corps Tactical School, as far as airmen
were concerned, were the accepted doctrines of the Air Corps and
served as guidance for forming strategic air plans. These American air
doctrines and concepts of air strategy were evolved at the Tactical
School in the 1930s.

Air Doctrine and Strategic Principles

The Air Corps Tactical School was established at Langley Field,
Virginia, in 1920. Beginning as a Field Officers’ School, it did not
expand its scope of instruction and stress airpower employment until
the end of the decade. Then, the school was blessed with a group of
gifted leaders and independent thinkers—Robert Olds, Kenneth
Walker, Harold Lee George, Donald Wilson, Muir “Santy” Fair-
child—names honored by the Air War College, Air Command and
Staff College, Air Force Academy, and throughout the modern Air
Force. But there was another stalwart leader who has received less
recognition, though he should be listed among the best. This was John
F. Curry, Commandant of the Air Corps Tactical School from 1931 to
1935, a period when the principal texts were prepared for Air Warfare
and Principles of Air Force Employment. Much of the basic strategy
of American air power was developed under his regime. At a time
when the War Department was threatening dire punishment from
above, Curry protected the freedom of his faculty. He made possible
the development of doctrines of air power which formed the basis for
the creation of the Army Air Forces (AAF) and its employment in
World War II. Under his leadership the school bridged the transition
from broad generalities of pioneering air prophets to more pragmatic
application of air power in attainment of specific objectives.

The early visionaries and proponents had made great claims for
air power. Their strategic concepts all depended upon one basic
tactical concept accepted by the Tactical School as a fundamental
doctrine: bombers could reach their targets and destroy them. The
Strategic airpower doctrine fashioned at the school rested on five
fundamental aphorisms:

1. Modern great powers rely on major industrial and economic

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 28 ---
MEMBERS OF THE TACTICAL SCHOOL FACULTY

ROBERT OLDS, instructor DONALD WILSON,
1928-1931 instructor 1931-1934;
department director 1936-1940

MUIR FAIRCHILD, HAROLD L. GEORGE,
instructor 1938-1940; instructor 1932-1934;
department director, 1940 department director 1934-1936

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 29 ---
COL. JOHN F. CURRY, ACTS Commandant
1931-1935 \

BRIG. GEN. WILLIAM “BILLY” MITCHELL

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 30 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

systems for production of weapons and supplies for their armed forces,
and for manufacture of products and provision of services to sustain
life in a highly industrialized society. Disruption or paralysis of these
systems undermines both the enemy’s capability and will to fight.

2. Such major systems contain critical points whose destruction
will break down these systems, and bombs can be delivered with
adequate accuracy to do this.

3. Massed air strike forces can penetrate air defenses without
unacceptable losses and destroy selected targets.

4. Proper selection of vital targets in the industrial/economic/
social structure of a modern industrialized nation, and their subse-
quent destruction by air attack, can lead to fatal weakening of an
industrialized enemy nation and to victory through air power.

5. If enemy resistance still persists after successful paralysis of
selected target systems, it may be necessary as a last resort to apply
direct force upon the sources of enemy national will by attacking
cities. In this event, it is preferable to render the cities untenable rather
than indiscriminately to destroy structures and people.

Since this philosophy had not been demonstrated in war, it was
not universally accepted even in the Air Corps. There was little
argument that nations needed industrial systems or that bombs could
paralyze such systems. But the third premise (“the bombers will
always get through”) was vigorously protested by the pursuit people.
However in 1932, when these concepts were first advanced, bombers
rode the crest of technological achievement. They were just about as
fast as the current fighters. Having the enormous advantage of the
initiative, they could pick the time, place, altitude, and route of attack.
Moreover, they could capitalize on the principle of mass, concentrat-
ing at the critical point. Defending pursuit planes possessed no such
advantage. This was before the day of radar or even an observer corps.
This still left one variable: Could the bombs be properly placed and, if
so, how large a force was necessary to reasonably assure getting the
requisite number of hits on the target? We worked up tables of
probability based on peacetime, daylight, visual bombing practice.
These served as a guide in selecting the size force that would assure the
desired bomb hits and destruction.

10

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 31 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

Accepting these basic tactical precepts and doctrine, the Air
Corps Tactical School turned to the problem of formulating strategic
doctrines for the support of national policy with air power. National
policy could vary within wide limits, and it was not feasible to cover
all purposes and situations. The school concentrated its efforts on
describing principles and doctrines involved in war with one or more
modern, major powers. It accepted as the national strategic purpose
the crushing of enemy opposition to the extent necessary for support
or attainment of the nation’s goals and aims. The school claimed that
air power could break down the enemy’s “will to resist” and
“capability to fight” by:

1. Destroying organic industrial systems in the enemy interior
that provided for the enemy’s armed forces in the field.

2. Paralyzing the organic industrial, economic, and civic systems
that maintained the life of the enemy nation itself. (Some of these
systems supported both the capability to fight and to sustain a modern
social and political structure.)

3. Attacking the people themselves, especially those concentrated
in the cities. (The school considered this method an undesirable
stratagem, one to be adopted only as a last resort.) The school
recognized a fourth obligation of air power: the defense of one’s own
sources of power.

This was not, of course, the sole employment of air power. The
flexibility of the air force enabled it to operate in parallel with or in
support of the surface forces, and there would be occasions when this
was the best employment. Still, the school believed the methods listed
above constituted the unique contribution of strategic air power to the
winning of wars. This line of reasoning ran directly counter to official
War Department doctrine, which asserted the Air Corps had no
mission beyond that of the army. The army alone could conquer and
hold territory, the only way to win wars. To do this, the army would
first have to defeat the enemy army, and the function of the Army Air
Corps should be to support the army in this endeavor. The Tactical
School did not deny the need of the army for air support. But it
insisted there was another and vital function of air power—the waging
of strategic air warfare beyond the scope of the battlefield.

11

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 32 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Development of principles of strategic air warfare simply had to
embrace offense and to consider basing of offensive air forces within
range of foreign nations. But the War Department, reflecting national
policy, strictly forbade any teaching other than defense of our borders.
The school sought to overcome these limitations in two ways. If we
were embroiled in a war involving major European nations, we could
anticipate having allies who could furnish bases for our air forces. And
official policy notwithstanding, strict adherence to defense would not
win wars. The school therefore undertook to formulate doctrine for
the air offensive against modern industrialized nations. In this regard,
it introduced a subtle but very significant variation from the doctrines
of Douhet and Mitchell. The latter advocated destruction of factories
and industrial centers and population centers. The school favored
destruction or paralysis of national organic systems on which many
factories and numerous people depended, but also accepted the need
for destroying a few highly important factories.

What were those critical organic systems whose destruction would
paralyze a modern state? Being strictly forbidden to examine foreign
countries, the Tactical School proposed to analyze the industrial might
of America. An analysis of our own industrial, economic, and social
complex and its vulnerability to air attack would serve for the
development of doctrines and principles of air employment anywhere.
Furthermore, the analysis would accord with national military policy,
inasmuch as air defense was first priority and we needed to know what
was most vulnerable to enemy air attack in order to plan defenses.

It soon became apparent that the very heart of our industrial
system was the electric power system. Practically all our industrial and
economic functions were totally dependent upon it. Then in order of
importance were these systems: transportation, chiefly our railroads;
fuel, including fuel-refining and distribution; food distribution and
preservation; and steel manufacturing, the manufacturing process
being vital to both the war-making capacity of the state, and to the
operation of the economic and industrial functions of the state itself.
In addition, there were a number of highly concentrated manufactur-
ing factories whose destruction would add a crippling blow. Among
these plants were electric generator, transformer, switch gear, and

12

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 33 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

motor manufacturing; locomotive manufacturing: shipbuilding; alumi-
num and magnesium.

Viewing this concept, as applied to our own nation, the Tactical
School concluded:

Loss of any of these systems would be a crippling blow. Loss of
several or all of them would bring national paralysis. As to repair of
this devastation, it would seem obvious that any air force worthy of
the name should be able to destroy faster than replacement could be
effected. .. . The airplane gives us a weapon which can immediately
reach the internal organization of an enemy nation, within range,
and therefore bring about the defeat of that nation. The fundamen-
tal innovation lies in the fact that whole nations now lie within the
combat zone.

As to strategic air intelligence, the school deemed it vital to
planning and operations of strategic air warfare. It should be collected
in time of peace and cover the economic, industrial, and social
structure of potential enemies. On the question of counter-air force
operations the school was moot. It was agreed that the “bombers
could get through,” but penetration of strong enemy defenses might
prove intolerably costly. Defeat of the enemy air defense force might
be necessary to assure the air offensive’s success against the interior
targets, and in any case would greatly increase the air attack’s
effectiveness. If so, the best method would entail air attack of enemy
bases, enemy aircraft and engine factories, enemy sources of aviation
fuel, and attrition through air combat attendant upon these missions.

The Tactical School took a look at one of our most troublesome
problems—direct attack against enemy centers of population (the
cities). Others, including Douhet, had advocated direct attack on
cities. The school opposed the concept which was generally described
as an attack on enemy morale. The idea of killing thousands of men,
women, and children was basically repugnant to American mores.
And from a more pragmatic point of view, people did not make good
targets for the high-explosive bomb, the principal weapon of the air
offensive. People can scatter, be evacuated, or be protected in shelters.
On the other hand, the cities were control points in the complex fabric

13

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 34 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

of the industrial structure—the management centers and focal points
of management communications. If their evacuation could be forced,
the industrial structure would suffer a serious blow. Dropping high-
explosive bombs on selected focal points might destroy vital civic
systems, render the cities untenable, and force their evacuation. A
study of New York revealed that a very small number of hits on a few
sensitive spots could cause collapse of the life-sustaining vital systems.
These points included such sensitive elements as water supply conduits
and pumping stations; railroads that literally carried the daily
requirements of food; highway bridges and tunnels; and terminal
facilities of the river and harbor barge system that served as a vast
distribution switchyard for distribution of goods and food. This
seemed a far better application of air power than scattering bombs in
urban areas.

The school sought to sponsor another doctrine, one dealing with
the tactical need for and provision of escort fighters to protect the
bombers. Here it was unsuccessful, running into the adamant opposi-
tion of the Pursuit Section and the Pursuit Board. With plausible
reasoning, the fighter experts asserted that a fighter with the range to
accompany bombers would be so large and heavy that short-range
interceptors could easily outfly and outfight them. Progress toward
developing a long-range fighter was the two-place PB-2 produced by
the Consolidated Aircraft Company. But the rear gunner was merely
an unnecessary burden with little firepower. Very fast and maneuver-
able for its day and with relatively long range, the aircraft might have
been developed into an effective escort fighter. However, the idea for
its tactical employment was fuzzy, and there was no charismatic
leader to support its doctrine. It is tragic that this was so, for the lack
of long-range fighters nearly halted the air offensive in 1943. Seeking
the only avenue open to them, the bombers increased armament and
massed defensive firepower from tight formations.

In putting forth the preceding arguments, airmen at the school
contended that, in seeking the ends of strategic air warfare in pursuit
of national goals, offensive air forces could be used in several ways.
They could be used as the primary war-winning force, supported or
followed by land and sea forces, as suggested by Air Marshal Smuts.

14

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 35 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

Or they could function as a collateral force, coequal with land or sea
forces, operating against separate but related objectives. In either
event, the strategic air forces would have to have strategic intelligence
peculiar to their own needs. To be effective in the pursuit of these two
air strategies, air power demanded concentration of effort and unified
command and control by an airman at the highest echelon of
command. The very flexibility of air forces made possible diversion of
the strategic element to a third role—support of land or sea force
objectives. This could occur when there was a dearth of vital enemy
industrial targets, the existence of an immediate national emergency,
or the overriding authority of superior command. Hence strategic
forces could be shifted to a support role. Still, if air forces were
designed and structured solely for the role of supporting land or sea
forces, they would be incapable of fighting effectively in a strategic
war.

Besides the specific doctrines of air employment, the Air Corps
Tactical School accepted and adapted the War Department Principles
of War to air power. The most important were:

The Objective Determine clearly what you want to accomplish
and stick to it.

The Offensive Only offensive action against the enemy will
produce victory.

Mass Concentrate the maximum possible effort to-
ward attainment of the main objective. Do not
permit the effort to be diverted from the
principal purpose.

Economy of The converse of the principle of mass. In all

Force other operations use as little force as possible in
order to concentrate mass on the principal
effort.

Security Unless the base of power is defended and

secure, it will be very difficult to sustain the
strategic offensive and to continue to prosecute
the war.

The Tactical School devised a form, the Air Estimate of the

15

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 36 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Situation for Strategic Air Warfare, to assist in determining the
optimum application of offensive strategic air power. The form’s
rationale was fairly simple, the most significant considerations being:
lefine clearly the purpose, the goal—what you want to accomplish;
consider the obstacles and opportunities in the broad situation; list the
actions (tasks) which, if successfully accomplished, would attain the
purpose, in order of desired priority; consider the force needed to carry
out each task; consider the capability of your own forces and
determine which of the tasks come within your capability; consider the
risks and possible losses of each task; select the tasks that will achieve
your purpose most effectively without unacceptable risk and loss, and
which come within your capability; prepare a plan to fulfill the
selected tasks. We used this form in preparing all the strategic war
plans. “Purpose” was the keynote: select targets that contribute most
to the purpose. The rationale also underscored the principle of
“Capacity of the Force.” That is, do not attempt tasks beyond your
capability. Keep your operations within the capability of the forces
available. It is far better to destroy a few vital targets completely than
to attack many targets inconclusively.

Though airmen at the Tactical School were slowly evolving a
concrete body of doctrine for the employment of strategic air forces,
the Army Air Corps had neither the organization nor the forces
required to implement it. The closest the Air Corps came to achieve
either in the 1930s was the establishment of General Headquarters Air
Force (GHQ Air Force) and the appearance of the B—-17 bomber.

The GHQ Air Force

In 1934 the Baker Board, while rejecting the concept of indepen-
dent strategic air warfare, did recommend the creation of a consolidat-
ed, centrally controlled air strike force, the GHQ Air Force. GHQ
would be the General Headquarters of the Army command in the
field, and during wartime the Commander of the GHQ Air Force
would be directly subject to the GHQ Commander. When the United
States was not engaged in war, the GHQ Air Force Commander was
responsible to the U.S. Army Chief of Staff. In keeping with the Baker

16

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 37 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

Board recommendations, the GHQ Air Force was activated in March
1935.

There were three views as to the purpose of the GHQ Air Force.
One view saw it as GHQ Aviation Reserve. This was a role advocated
for Army aviation after World War I. Parts of the GHQ Air Force
would be apportioned out and attached to field armies and corps as the
situation demanded. A second view saw the GHQ Air Force as a
cohesive air-striking force to be employed as a unit in furtherance of
the Army mission. Still a third view—one held by airmen—was that it
was a unified striking force available for use beyond the sphere of
activity of the Army as well as in support of the Army. In other words,
airmen viewed the GHQ Air Force as an air force with missions of its
own. The first Commanding General of the GHQ Air Force, Maj.
Gen. Frank M. Andrews, felt no doubt about the issue and left no
doubt in the minds of his associates. To General Andrews, the GHQ
Air Force was an instrument of air power.

Actually, however, as the War Department underwent a series of
reorganizations after 1939 in the face of the growing possibilities of
U.S. involvement in World War II, the concept of a GHQ went out
the window and with it the GHQ Air Force. The GHQ Air Force was
too short lived to leave any outstanding legacy of air doctrine. But it
had demonstrated in several dramatic flights that the bomber had
superb flexibility and could quickly be deployed to remote bases.
Significantly, despite the fight of airmen for acceptance of airpower
theories, as late as 1939 the War Department was still saying: “The
mission of the air component of the Army is to perform effectively the
air operations devolving upon the Army in its assigned functions in the
national defense. . . . Air operations beyond the sphere of action of the
surface forces are undertaken in furtherance of the strategic plan of the
commander of the field force.”

American Strategic Air Doctrine
The Army Air Corps had no official basis on which to promulgate

air doctrine. It was a part of the U.S. Army and doctrine was issued by
the War Department for all branches of the Army. Nevertheless, by

17

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 38 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

the 1930s the teachings and texts of the Air Corps Tactical School
were accepted as doctrine within the Air Corps. The Army Air Corps
considered that strategic air warfare embraced five optional categories:

1. a. Direct attack on enemy armed forces, including air forces
on the ground and in the air; on concentration of troops; on naval and
maritime elements; and on logistics in the combat zone.

b. Local air defense of friendly military forces and bases.

2. a. Indirect air attack of enemy armed forces by destroying the
industrial elements which supplied and supported the enemy armed
forces. Target objectives included industrial systems that made war
production possible, such as:

(1) Electric power systems (generating stations, transform-
er and switching stations, dams and penstocks).

(2) Natural fuel, refining, and transfer systems; synthetic
fuel production systems; transportation systems (rail, highway, canal,
sea).

(3) Special factories and arsenals (aircraft and aircraft
engine, tank, weapons, and ammunition factories; major interior
depots; rubber production facilities).

(4) Basic war-supporting materials (steel plants, aluminum
and magnesium plants).

b. Local interior air defense of friendly forces and installa-
tions vital to munitions manufacture.

3. Direct air attack on the economic and social systems and
structure of the enemy state, including destruction or neutralization of
major supporting systems (electric power, communication, basic
economic industrial production, water supply, industrial and econom-
ic transportation, food-handling, food-production, food preservation
and distribution, and management control).

a. Many of the national industrial systems and economic
systems supported the enemy capability to sustain the armed forces
and the ability to continue to fight. These were also vital to the
continued operation of the state itself as a modern industrialized
society—systems bolstering the political will to resist of the enemy
nation.

b. Industrial and economic systems of the national state body

18

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 39 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

were likened to the vital organic systems that give life and activity to
the human body. Electric power was the heart, without whose
continued function all directed activity is paralyzed. Transportation
was the system of arteries carrying energy to the vital organs. Fuel
systems were the metabolic functions that translate sources of energy
to muscular action. Communications were the nervous system. All
served the brain, the source of political decision. All were vital to the
civil as well as to the military capabilities of the enemy state. Their
paralysis undermine both the military capability of the enemy state
and the social and political “will to resist.”” They were pertinent to both
2 and 3 above.

4. Direct air attack on enemy social centers, including cities and
factory worker dwelling areas.

5. Strategic air defense of one’s own urban, industrial, economic,
and base areas.

Within the constraints imposed on them, the airmen were
thinking more and more about sustained, high-altitude bombing of
selected industrial targets and supporting systems in order to attain
national goals in war. Yet that was just the beginning, the expression
of an abstract concept. To think and plan in practical terms, it was
necessary to consider: What were our national goals and purposes, and
what were the threats to those goals? Who were our potential enemies,
and where in their industrial and social structure lay the weak links?
How vulnerable were these targets? What measures would the enemy
probably take to protect them? How far were they from our air bases?
What new air bases would have to be acquired?

The problem was vastly complicated for it presumed knowledge
about a nation which that nation naturally tried to hide. Much of the
value of the bombing offensive, should there be one, would of necessity
rest on intelligence data and the conclusions planners gleaned from it.
In truth these specific questions were beyond the competence of the
Tactical School. Strategic air intelligence on major world powers
would demand an intelligence organization and analytical competence
of considerable scope and complexity.

19

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 40 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Strategic Air Intelligence

In 1940 the Office of the Chief of the Air Corps had an
Information Division dealing chiefly with public relations, but the Air
Corps had no Strategic Intelligence Division. Military intelligence was
the province of G-2 of the U.S. Army General Staff and its
prerogatives were jealously guarded.

A simple example is illustrative. As a new member of the
Information Division in 1940, I undertook to promote inquiries I
thought might be useful. Japan was not yet at war with the West but
she was aligned with Germany and Italy, and Nazi Germany was
actively engaged in war on her Western Front. It seemed likely the
war would spread and Japan would extend her operations in China
and the China Sea. If we should be drawn in, we might find the coast
of China blockaded by Japanese naval power and inaccessible to us. In
that case, if we wanted to support China and establish air bases there
for attack of Japan, we would have to approach from India and
Burma. I prepared a draft paper proposing that U.S. Army engineers
be sent to survey the Burma Road and report upon the possibilities of
maintaining military logistic communications.

I took the draft paper to my friend and classmate Capt. Andral
Bratton, Far East desk, G-2. He enthusiastically endorsed the
proposal and asked to keep the draft memorandum for discussion with
his associates. In due course it came back to me through portentous
channels. Brig. Gen. Sherman Miles, G-2 of the War Department, had
sent it to the Deputy Chief of Staff, Maj. Gen. William Bryden, with a
complaint that the Office of the Chief of the Air Corps had no business
intruding in such matters. The Deputy Chief had passed the complaint
to the Chief of the Air Corps with the comment that if the officers of
the Information Division had no more useful occupation for their
energies than this, he was prepared to disband the Information
Division and transfer its personnel to G—2 where their talents could be
directed to some useful purpose. Even General Arnold was miffed—
and when he was miffed people soon found out about it. Doubtless he
was embarrassed to be called down about an incident of which he had
no knowledge. In sending the correspondence down to the Informa-

20

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 41 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

tion Division, he penned the comment, “I am inclined to agree with
General Bryden.” The incident passed, but it served to slam shut the
door connecting the Air Corps Information Division and G-2.

Not long thereafter the relationship—or lack of it—surfaced
again. General Arnold had an informal conversation with Lt. Col.
Truman Smith, recently returned from Berlin as the Assistant Military
Attaché. Smith furnished General Arnold many details of the
Luftwaffe and German aircraft production of which Arnold was
ignorant. The general demanded to know why such information had
not been passed to him previously. Obviously it was of vital
importance to the Air Corps. He was informed that these and
numerous other facts were reported to G-2. General Arnold went to
General Miles, G-2, and posed the same question. He was advised that
intelligence of this nature was restricted to members of the War
Department General Staff (WDGS), and Arnold as Chief of the Air
Corps was not a member of the General Staff and hence was not on the
distribution list.

Arnold went directly to Chief of Staff Gen. George C. Marshall
and requested authority to set up an air intelligence system with
Assistant Military Attachés for Air at U.S. embassies abroad. General
Marshall approved the request. Next, Col. Ira Eaker, Arnold’s
Executive Officer, sent for Maj. Thomas D. White and me. He
described General Marshall’s authorization, and said General Arnold
directed us to get on with it. Tommy White was a gifted intellectual
and a highly qualified Air Corps officer. Having extensive experience
abroad, he was fluent in Chinese and French. He was also a recent
graduate of the Air Corps Tactical School and the Army Command
and Staff School at Fort Leavenworth.

After discussing the scope of the problem facing us, we divided
the program into two broad parts: foreign collection, and strategic
analyses. As Chief of the Air Intelligence Section, Tommy organized a
system of Assistant Military Attachés for Air and the collection of
information through them. He selected the attachés, brought them to
Washington for orientation and instruction, and sent them abroad. He
also arranged the channels for communication, which provided that

21

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 42 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

G-2 of the War Department General Staff should have copies of all
pertinent reports.

I undertook the area of strategic air intelligence and analysis. I set
up three subsections, or branches: one devoted to foreign air forces,
including size, composition, equipment, disposition, tactical doctrine,
and proficiency; another dealing with airports and air bases through-
out the world, together with maps and weather data; and a third
engaging in economic-industrial-social analysis of major foreign
powers, culminating in analysis and description of vital and vulnerable
systems and, finally, target selection and preparation of target folders.

This latter activity involved a completely new venture. The
Army’s G-2 gave us no help whatsoever. On the contrary, we ran into
vigorous opposition to the collection and analysis of such information
on the grounds that it did not relate to the proper role of military
intelligence. We had to proceed on our own, pioneering in one of the
most difficult, critical, and challenging areas in the field of intelli-
gence. We knew correct collection and analysis was vital to the success
of the strategic air effort. Moreover, miscalculations of any significant
magnitude could completely discredit the concept. I believed foreign
industrial analysis and targeting was the sine qua non of strategic air
warfare. Without such intelligence and analysis there could be no
rational planning for the application of air power. Douhet’s statement
to the effect that the selection of objectives and targets was the essence
of air strategy was patently true.

Our approach to industrial analysis as a basis for targeting was
not started from scratch. At the Tactical School we had laid out the
methodology and, since we had no foreign intelligence, we used the
industrial structure of the United States as a working model. It was an
abstract exercise lacking in practical results, but it did help to focus
attention on the importance of certain systems and factories: electric
power; rail transportation; fuel; basic materials such as steel; food
supplies and processing; water supplies; and armaments and aircraft
factories.

In view of the world situation, the Strategic Air Intelligence
Section naturally concentrated on the Axis powers. It was slow and
tedious work, but ultimately we made a lot of headway with Germany

22

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 43 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

and Italy. Japan, however, was a different story. The Japanese had
established and maintained a curtain of secrecy that we found
absolutely impenetrable. There were not even any recent maps
available.

The rising concern in the United States about Hitler’s Germany
was of great value to us in our work. It led a number of gifted men to
enter the service and contribute their special talents. Also, it made
available modest sums of money for hiring civilian experts. We were
fortunate to hire Dr. James T. Lowe, a specialist in diplomatic history
and international relations. Another civilian-turned-military was Maj.
Malcolm Moss, a man of broad experience in international business
who had traveled extensively. We were also fortunate in enlisting the
services of a man with a doctorate in industrial economics and one
who was an expert in oil.

Our initial inquiries into the industrial-economic structure of
Hitler’s Germany focused attention on: electric power, as well as
electric switching, transmission, and distribution systems, and sources
of fuel; steel production, including sources and movement of raw
material; petroleum production, distribution, and products, and
synthetic processes; the aircraft industry, taking in engine and aircraft
manufacturing plants and aluminum production; and transportation,
the most prominent components being the railway, canal, and highway
networks. Our analyses also encompassed Germany’s nonferrous
metal supply, machine tool production, and food processing and
distribution.

Malcolm Moss made a particularly valuable suggestion with
regard to the electric power system in Germany. He knew the electric
power generating and distribution system of Germany was relatively
new and had been built with capital borrowed largely from the United
States. He also knew American banks did not lend large sums of
money for capital equipment without carefully investigating the
proposed structures. He suggested we inquire of the great international
banks, particularly in New York, if they had drawings and specifica-
tions of German electric plants and systems. The results were fruitful
and rewarding. Using these sources, together with scientific journals
and trade magazines, we put together a comprehensive target study on

23

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 44 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

the German electric power system and electric distribution system. It
was even possible to prepare target folders, aiming points, and bomb
sizes.

We also made substantial progress on information about petro-
leum and synthetic oil plants, partially through the same sources, in
part from the oil industries, and to a degree through individuals.
Fortunately, our civilian oil expert had worked in Germany, in the
Rumanian fields at Ploesti, and in the Middle East. It was through his
knowledge and analysis that we recognized the extreme importance
and vulnerability of the German synthetic oil plants, and the related
importance of the Ploesti refineries. Thus we were able to prepare
target folders, aiming points, and bomb sizes for these target systems.
In addition, we made an analysis of the German steel industry and its
sources of raw materials. We were less successful in our analysis of
German transportation, partly because of the extent of the rail and
canal systems. But enough was discovered to place the transportation
system high on the priority list of desirable targets.

Later in 1941, I had a chance to go to England as an observer. The
express purpose of my visit was to explore British intelligence, in
response to a generous invitation by the Royal Air Force, and bring
home what I could. At the same time, I took a hard look at possible air
base construction sites in England, since by this time British and
American military leaders had met in Washington in what became
known as the ABC Conferences. We knew if we should become
involved in the war, we would probably be allied with Britain against
Germany and that the bomber offensive, if we ever launched one,
would probably be from bases in Britain.

My relations with the RAF and the Air Ministry were extremely
gratifying. I spent much of my time with Gp. Capt. A. C. H. “Bobby”
Sharp, and I was literally welcomed into the inner chamber of RAF
intelligence. I had brought along digests of our own intelligence and
was made more comfortable by the discovery that we had much to
offer. On balance, we were better informed than the British on
German electric power, petroleum, and synthetic products. The RAF
was better informed on Germany aircraft and engine production, the
German Air Force, and German transportation.

24

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 45 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

At the end of my visit I found myself happily loaded down with
priceless gifts of intelligence. The burden was formidable. There was
nearly a ton of it. Most of this was in the form of “target folders”
rather than analysis of target systems, but it was very valuable and
most gratefully received. I wondered how to get it back to the United
States, since it was, for the most part, classified secret. In the end I was
able to have it shipped back by air in an American bomber.

Planning for War

Immediately after my return to Washington in July 1941 I was
transferred from the Strategic Air Intelligence Section, A—2, to the
new Air War Plans Division. Thus I again came under Lt. Col Harold
L. George and Lt. Col. Kenneth N. Walker. Until the division was
enlarged, the task of organizing our efforts to meet the broad
assignment of developing “overall plans for the control of the activities
of the Army Air Forces” fell upon the three of us. In this crucial state
of affairs, it was a formidable assignment embracing such questions as
size, composition, equipment, disposition, and organization of the air
forces. And these in turn invoked the need to adopt the optimum
concept for the wartime employment of these forces. Moreover, it was
axiomatic that employment must make its maximum contribution in
support of overall national policy.

At the time, national policy was very difficult to define. Nowhere
was it clearly and neatly described. It was apparent that President
Franklin D. Roosevelt viewed the possibility of a Nazi victory with
deep concern. For six months after the fall of France, Britain had
stood alone. With the German attack on Russia in June 1941, Britain
gained a breathing spell, but it seemed likely the Soviets would be
defeated. If so, the whole might of the victorious German Wehrmacht
would then be turned against Britain. Furthermore, the vast industrial
complex of Europe would be available for the production of muni-
tions, including the creation of massive German air forces. The
prospect was ominous to say the least. President Roosevelt seemed to
favor American intervention before the collapse of Britain should
make it a lost venture.

25

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 46 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

The United States as a whole was nowhere near such a mood.
Most Americans seemed to cling to the hope that we could save the
remnants of freedom and democracy in Europe by providing material
aid to Britain. They were even willing to extend such aid to Soviet
Russia in the belief a surviving Communist regime was a much lesser
threat than a triumphant Nazi Germany. They were willing to extend
our naval screen far out into the Atlantic and to prepare for active
defense of the entire Western Hemisphere. But they were not ready to
take the step of active participation in the war in Europe. Roosevelt
had to retreat from his semi-belligerent policies on several occasions
when it was clear that most of the American people were not willing to
go so far. His Far Eastern policies caused little public concern. The
American people simply could not believe Japan would challenge the
United States in open warfare.

Until American policy firmed considerably, the best we could do
for guidance was to determine in broad terms the general characteris-
tics of the force requirements America seemed most likely to need. For
those characteristics, we naturally turned back to lengthy discussions
we had had on the subject back at the Air Corps Tactical School. We
had reasoned that armed forces, as instruments for the furtherance of
national policy, might be called upon to perform in three ways. One
was the active acquisition of foreign territory. This would place
primary reliance on land armies, and this objective seemed remote.
However, taking temporary military action abroad in support of our
national interest seemed increasingly probable. If so, chief dependence
might be on the air force, or it might rest upon land armies, with naval
and air forces operating in support roles. The possibility that
aggressive action by forces unfriendly to the United States might
compel us to take some action to protect our national interests and to
force a halt upon the aggressor seemed a distinct possibility and
received careful consideration. Air power might play the dominant
role here. The third possibility, national and hemispheric defense,
would require primary reliance upon air power for air defense and
might call upon air power to repel any invasion.

Three dictators hostile to the United States were driving toward
domination of important parts of the world. They threatened com-

26

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 47 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

pletely to upset the balance of power and with it world peace. Adolph
Hitler and Benito Mussolini had completed the conquest of much of
Europe and the Balkans and were verging on the conquest of western
Russia and North Africa. England might either fall or be forced into a
humiliating accommodation. On the other side of the world the
Japanese warlords were tearing China and Southeast Asia apart.
Meanwhile a fourth dictator, Joseph Stalin, though hardly a friend of
America, was a most valuable asset in resisting Hitler. And it seemed
likely he too would be overwhelmed.

Strategic Guidelines

If in mid-1941 there were no firm national policies on which to
structure our national defense, there were at least certain strategic
guidelines. In September 1940 the Tripartite Pact had brought Japan
openly into the Axis camp. At about the same time, the unexpected
collapse of France, followed by the epic Battle of Britain, had opened
the eyes of many American political and military leaders to the
possibility of a world dominated by Hitler in the West and by Japan in
the East. As a result, the President decided to offer material aid from
the “arsenal of democracy” to those fighting the Axis. Also, after
consultation with the Secretaries of War, Navy, and State, the
President concluded that some formal military staff conversations
with the British were in order. There followed a series of secret joint
meetings in Washington at the end of January 1941, conferences
known to history as ABC-1.*

The British personnel attending were Rear Adm. Roger M.
Bellairs and Rear Adm. Victor H. Danckwerts, representing the Royal
Navy; Maj. Gen. Edwin L. Morris, representing the British Army; and
Air Vice Marshal John C. Slessor, representing the Royal Air Force.
The United States personnel attending were Rear Adm. Robert L.
Ghormley, Rear Adm. Richmond K. Turner, Capt. Alan G. Kirk, and

*ABC-1 is the short title for the report of these British-American joint meetings. Starting
on January 29 and ending on March 29, 1941, representatives of the two staffs held fourteen
sessions and discussed military and naval strategy, joint operations, geographical responsibilities,
force structure, command arrangements, and limited operational plans.

27

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 48 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Capt. DeWitt C. Ramsey, all of the U.S. Navy, and Col. Omar T.
Pfeiffer, U.S. Marine Corps. Lt. Gen. Stanley D. Embick, Brig. Gen.
Sherman Miles, and Brig. Gen. Leonard T. Gerow represented the
U.S. Army, and Col. Joseph T. McNarney, from the War Plans
Division of the General Staff, represented the Army Air Corps.
Although there were “rated” air officers of the United States present,
there was no official representative of United States air power in a
position corresponding to that of the RAF representative.

On an informal basis the Plans Division and Intelligence Division
of the Office of Chief of the Air Corps cooperated very closely with
Air Vice Marshal John Slessor and members of his staff and with
Colonel McNarney. One of the most vital and fruitful developments of
this informal relationship was a detailed exploration of the potential
air base capacity of the United Kingdom, a capacity found to be
several times greater than air planners in the United States had
anticipated.

Our informal plans for possible deployment of the U.S. Army Air
Forces to England had been predicated upon and limited by an
analysis of existing airports. After making allowance for RAF
requirements for air bases, it appeared the remainder would drastically
restrict American air force deployment. Group Captain Sharp, who
was in Washington on logistic matters at this time, produced a survey
of suitable sites in England on which air bases could be built. It
completely revolutionized our ideas of the potential capacity for
accommodating U.S. air units. This discovery had an immense effect
upon the dimensions of the air offensive that might be sustained from
Britain and the potential scope of American air participation. The
results that might be obtained from such an air offensive became a
major aspect of combined offensive strategy.

The agreements and conclusions reached by the ABC-1 conferees
were furnished to Roosevelt and Churchill in March 1941. The results
of these conversations on the subsequent strategic developments of the
war were profound. As a consequence, the U.S. Air Force owes an
immense debt to Sir John Slessor and Colonel McNarney. The salient
features of these conversations, predicated on the contingency the
United States might be compelled to participate in the war, included

28

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 49 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

these points: Since the Atlantic-European area was deemed to be the
decisive theater, the primary effort would be exerted there. Offensive
measures in the European area would embrace a sustained air
offensive against military power, supplemented by air offensives on
other enemy regions contributing to that power. Italy would be
eliminated early on. Raids and minor offensives would be conducted
initially against the Continent. Support would be given to all neutrals
and belligerents who opposed the Axis. Forces would be built up for
an eventual offensive on Germany, and positions from which the
offensive could be launched would be captured.

This agreement was incorporated with the war plans being
prepared by the War and Navy Departments, and on May 14, 1941,
the Joint Army and Navy Board approved the war plan known as
Rainbow No. 5.* It was subsequently approved by the Secretaries of
War and the Navy. When the Air War Plans Division of the Air Staff
came into being in July 1941, it found itself in solid accord with the
ABC conversations and with Rainbow No. 5, the overall war plan
envisioning Great Britain and the United States standing against
Germany, Italy, and Japan.

War in Europe

As Hitler’s armies cut their paths of victory through Europe, a
mounting wave of apprehension engulfed the Roosevelt administration
in Washington. Programs for expansion of the armed forces were
presented to a reluctant Congress. One such program called for
expansion of the Army Air Corps to fifty-four groups. It was
presented to Gen. George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff, early in 1940.
On conclusion of the presentation by Capt. Laurence S. Kuter,
General Marshall asked a penetrating question: “Why is this a fifty-
four group program? Why not fifty-six, or sixty-four?” As usual,

*In 1939 American war planners adopted the term “Rainbow” to describe a series of plans
outlining the broad national strategic goals of the United States. They called the plans Rainbow
because earlier war plans, written in the 1920s and 1930s, had been labeled with colors “orange,”
“red,” etc. The single-color plans had anticipated wars against a single nation. By 1941 the
conquests by Germany, Japan, and Italy had altered the assumptions of all previous American
war planning.

29

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 50 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

General Marshall had gone directly to the root of the problem. What
purpose was to be sought? What was the objective? Did it require fifty-
four groups to attain that objective? Why? What was the strategic
plan?

When the next opportunity arose for presentation of a major
program, General Marshall’s lesson was remembered. The planners
asked themselves what was expected to be achieved with the force?
What was the purpose?

Concern over Hitler’s aggressive acquisitions in Europe produced
other reactions in America. In June 1941 Secretary of War Henry L.
Stimson, acting on General Marshall’s recommendation, established
the Army Air Forces. General Arnold, Chief of the Army Air Force,
was permitted to set up a staff for the AAF resembling the War
Department General Staff but at a lower level. It included Personnel,
Intelligence, Operations and Training, Materiel, and Air War Plans
Divisions. Lt. Col. Harold George at the time commanded the 2d
Bombardment Group containing all the B-17s of the AAF (all
thirteen of them). He was reassigned to Washington to organize and
operate the Air War Plans Division of the Air Staff, arriving on July
14.

The next major force-structuring effort grew out of a new
presidential inquiry. On July 9, 1941—some two weeks after Hitler
had mounted his massive attack on Russia—Roosevelt asked the
Secretaries of War and Navy to prepare an estimate of “the overall
production requirements required to defeat our potential enemies.”
There was as usual a short deadline for a reply. Because the Joint
Army and Navy Board could not agree upon an operational strategy,
the War and Navy Departments each put together its needs separately.
The burden of writing the War Department’s response fell upon the
War Plans Division of the WDGS. That division proposed to estimate
air requirements, coordinate them with ground requirements, and
append the air details to its report as Annex 2, Air Requirements.
Colonel George, Chief of the fledgling Air War Plans Division, asked
that his division be allowed to prepare the Air Annex. General Arnold
made the necessary arrangements.

The War Plans Group of the infant Air War Plans Division

30

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 51 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

consisted of two people: Lt. Col. Kenneth N. Walker as Chief of the
Group, and myself, Chief of the European Branch—two chiefs and no
Indians at all. Harold George devoted his full time to the project, and
that made three. He succeeded in having Larry Kuter, on duty with
G-3 of the General Staff, temporarily assigned to the division. The
four of us were faced with the task of preparing a strategic air plan for
conducting war on a worldwide scale, and determining the forces to
carry out such a plan. We would be constrained only by the physical
capability of the United States to produce the recommended forces.

In this latter regard, we had the benefit of advice and counsel from
the supply people at Dayton, with Maj. Max F. Schneider serving as a
priceless liaison. By the time we got authority to proceed, there were
just seven days left for submission of the plan and report. We had one
definite asset going for us: We had spent years together as instructors
in Bombardment and Air Force at the Air Corps Tactical School. We
embraced a common concept of air warfare and we spoke a common
language. Then, too, I had spent the past year as head of the Strategic
Air Intelligence Section of the Office of the Chief of the Air Corps,
amassing and analyzing economic and industrial intelligence on the
Axis powers. That intelligence now proved invaluable.

Harking back to General Marshall’s comments as well as to our
own teachings, we realized the first requirement for our plan was a
statement of purpose—a strategic objective. What should the air force
try to achieve? What was the overall purpose? That was the
fundamental keystone to plans, requirements, and operations. But that
purpose was not only missing from our instructions; it was exceedingly
hard to define.

The President’s letter had called for defeat of our potential enemies.
This was important guidance. Although he did not specify who our
potential enemies were, there could be little doubt they were the Axis
powers. His call for defeat cleared the air of any compromise objective,
such as containment or deterrence. And we had two other significant
guidelines. In passing the air requirement responsibility to the Air Staff,
Brig. Gen. Leonard T. Gerow, Chief of the War Plans Division, had
stipulated that the provisions of joint British-American conversations
(ABC-1) and the U.S. current war plan (Rainbow No. 5) should be

31

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 52 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

followed. The ABC-1 report called for strategic offensive operations
against the European Axis powers as a maximum effort and strategic
defensive operations in the Far East, with minimum diversion of forces
from the main effort. It said: Offensive measures in the European area
will include a sustained air offensive against German military power,
supplemented by air offensives against other regions under enemy
control which contribute to that power.

But what should be the relationship of air power to the
achievement of the national purpose and to land and naval forces? Air
forces were flexible, but special types of aircraft were best suited to
specific roles, and the selection and provision of aircraft would depend
upon the major role to be assumed by air power. Even in defeating the
European Axis powers there was a wide range of strategic air purposes
to be weighed:

a. Should the “sustained air offensive against German military
power” seek to crush the war-making capability of the Third Reich by
air warfare alone? If so, it would be necessary to destroy not only the
industrial structure supporting the German armed forces, but the
industrial and economic structure upholding the state itself.

b. Or should the “sustained air offensive” seek to undermine the
war-making capability of Germany and pave the way for invasion of
the Continent, with subsequent strategic air operations weakening
Germany’s willingness and capability to fight, in a continuing strategic
air effort coordinated with the land campaign?

c. Or should the sustained air offensive seek only to guarantee
the success of the invasion, and devote its entire strength to the
support and success of the land operations, which would become the
sole reliance for final victory?

d. And what were the requirements for home defense?

The targets, the types and number of aircraft, and the organiza-
tion of the air forces would vary with each of these options. Selection
of a basic overall strategy was the sine qua non of air planning. And
the problem was further compounded by the knowledge that the plan
would have to pass through the gauntlet of the War Department
General Staff, culminating in a presentation to General Marshall. If he
did not approve, the whole scheme would simply be discarded.

32

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 53 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

Marshall was himself a farsighted, broad-minded leader who had
shown strong support for air power. But many Army officers still
adhered to the official statement of Army doctrine: the sole mission of
the Army Air Forces was the furtherance of the mission of the mobile
army.

We knew a strategy oriented solely to invasion and air support of
ground warfare in Europe involved troublesome prospects, including
long and perhaps disastrous delays. We knew the War Plans Division
had concluded it would take two years to build a merchant marine
capable of transporting and supplying the necessary ground forces.
And it would take another six months to prepare them for invasion.
An air offensive could be launched in half the time. Furthermore, the
War Plans Division was frank in admitting that Hitler’s seasoned war
machine would have to be seriously weakened before we could hope to
defeat the German Wehrmacht on the ground. In any event, the
German air forces would have to be defeated before an invasion could
be undertaken. There was general agreement that a successful air
offensive, which would include defeat of the Luftwaffe, must precede
any invasion. There was less unanimity as to what other purposes the
air offensive should try to accomplish.

We wrestled as a group with this fundamental problem. The final
solution was a statement of objective and a plan leaning heavily
toward victory through air power. But it provided for air support of an
invasion, and afterwards combined operations on the Continent if the
air offensive should prove inconclusive. If the air offensive succeeded
in destroying the German ability to support the war or in bringing
about capitulation, so much the better. The closer the air offensive
came to finality, the greater the ease and less the cost of invasion.

In the Air Plan we described the overall objective of the air
mission in essentially these terms:

a. To wage a sustained air offensive against German military
power, supplemented by air offensives against other regions under
enemy control which contribute toward that power (ABC-1).

b. To support a final offensive, if it becomes necessary to invade
the Continent.

33

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 54 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

c. In addition, to conduct effective air operations in connection
with hemisphere defense and a strategic defensive in the Far East.

d. The basic concept on which this plan is based lies in the
application of air power for the breakdown of the industrial and
economic structure of Germany. This conception involves the selec-
tion of a system of objectives vital to the continued German war effort
and to the means of livelihood of the German people, and tenaciously
concentrating all bombing toward the destruction of those objectives.
The most effective manner of conducting such a decisive offensive is
by the destruction of precise objectives, at least initially. As German
morale begins to crack, area bombing of civil concentrations may be
effective.

e. It is improbable that a land invasion can be carried out against
Germany proper within the next three years. If the air offensive is
successful, a land offensive may not be necessary.

In the plan we acknowledged that the German Air Force,
especially the German fighter force, would have to be defeated before
an invasion could be contemplated. And such a defeat might also be
necessary to the prosecution of the air offensive itself. Hence defeat of
the German Air Force was accorded first priority among air objectives
(‘an intermediate objective of overriding importance’), to take prece-
dence over the primary air objectives themselves.

As for primary objectives, the plan called for destruction and
disruption of:

a. Electric power. Disruption of a major portion of the German
electric power system.

(1) Nearly all industry—civil as well as military—finds its
roots in electric power. The German electric power system, the second
largest in the world, was greatly expanded for this war. Even so, it is
operating at a fifty-percent greater rate than that of Great Britain. It is
vital to the German war effort and is highly important to civil life.

(2) The electric power system might be likened to the neuro-
muscular system of the human body. Disruption would vitiate
controlled action. It is estimated that destruction of fifty targets would
bring about collapse.

b. Transportation. The German transportation system is carrying

34

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 55 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

an extremely heavy load, divided about as follows: seventy-two percent
of German transportation is carried out by the railroads, twenty-five
percent by canals and waterways, and three percent by long-haul
truckage. The transportation system bears the same relationship to the
German corporate body as the bloodstream to the human body.
Without a free flow of transportation, raw materials could not reach
processing plants, manufactured parts and supplies could not reach
factories and assembly plants, and finished products could not reach
consumers, whether they be armed forces or civilian institutions.
Forty-one targets, consisting of marshaling yards, bridges, canal locks,
and inland harbors are set up for the accomplishment of this objective.
c. Petroleum and synthetic oil.

(1) German military vehicles and transportation, the German
Air Force, the German Navy, and (a large block of) German industry
are dependent upon petroleum products.

(2) The blockade has cut off external sources, other than
Rumania, leaving the Reich heavily dependent upon a group of
synthetic oil plants. Twenty-seven synthetic plants plus the refineries
at Ploesti in Rumania are set up to accomplish this objective.

In summary, the plan called for destruction of these target

systems and targets:
German Air Force 18 airplane assembly plants
6 aluminum plants
6 magnesium plants

Electric power 50 generating plants and
switching systems
Transportation 47 marshaling yards, bridges,
and locks
Synthetic petroleum 27 synthetic plants
Total 154 targets

How many planes?—How many people?

Bombing requirements for the destruction of each target, includ-
ing repeat attacks to prevent restoration, were computed, using target
dimensions and characteristics and tables of bombing probability.
Force requirements were based on providing ninety-percent probabili-

35

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 56 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

ty of obtaining the number of hits to destroy each target. Accuracy
was degraded by a factor of two and one-fourth to take care of
bombing accuracy under combat conditions. Allowances were made
for aborts and losses. Based on weather records, the monthly rate of
operations from British bases was taken at five. Finally, the total of
bomber sorties was computed, and the number of bombers needed to
accomplish the entire task in six months at the rate of five missions a
month was determined. The key element in the entire plan was the
proviso that the full bomber force should devote its entire strength to
these targets for six months after it had reached maturity. Invasion
would follow if necessary. Requirements for hemispheric defense were
also estimated. The allowances for the defensive measures needed in
the Far East were skimpy, to say the least. It was presumed the U.S.
Navy would be the primary agency for this requirement.

The air plan specified that the offensive be conducted chiefly from
bases in England, using B-17s and B-24s, and from bases in Northern
Ireland and the vicinity of Cairo, Egypt, using future long-range
bombers (B—29s). But the plan covered a contingency that bordered on
disaster. Hitler’s armies were slashing into Russia and would soon
approach the gates of Moscow. If Russia should be defeated, Hitler
could rebuild his air forces using all the resources of Europe. He could
then mass his forces for a final assault on Britain, and Britain might
also succumb. If so, the British air bases would no longer be available.
To meet this contingency, the plan envisioned the development and
production of 44 groups of 4,000—mile bombers (B-36s)—to press the
war from bases in the Western Hemisphere. Still the strategic plan
presumed British bases would in fact continue to be available. If these
air operations against industrial targets were not conclusive, the plan
suggested direct attack on cities as a last resort. But we never accepted
attack on civilian populations as the main method of air warfare. We
provided for air support of an invasion of France if the air offensive
should not be conclusive after 6 months of undiluted effort. The air
plan afforded massive additional tactical air forces for air support of
an invasion and for subsequent combined operations on the Continent.
Actually the Tactical and Air Defense Air Forces and Strategic Air

36

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 57 ---
PLANNED AIR OFFENSIVE AGAINST GERMANY (AWPD-1)

ARCTIC SEA

ATLANTIC OCEAN

TOTAL
10 Groups Pursuit
(1300 airplanes)

To defend our
own air bases

12 Groups
Heavy Bombers
816 B-29s | oy

Ss GREAT
20 Groups |“BRITAIN
Heavy
Bombers

1360 B-17s POLAND

“a

10 Groups

Medium

Bombers .

850 B-26s , RM. SLOVAKIA

HUNGARY
BLACK SEA
A
‘Ny uGosLAv!

BULGARIA

ALBANIA

GREECE

MOROCCO
MEDITERRANEAN SE
TUNISIA — ANEAN SEA PALESTINE

AAF BASES IN NEAR EAST
12 Gps H-Bomb 816 B-29s
6 Gps Pur 780 airplanes

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 58 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

Forces were approximately equal in numbers: 12,000 first-line and unit
reserve aircraft in each.

To pursue this strategy, the plan (Air War Plans Division I, or
AWPD-1) called for some 61,800 aircraft (including 37,000 trainers),
as well as 180,000 officers and 1,985,000 enlisted personnel—a total of
2,165,000 men and women. The scope of the air proposal was simply
staggering. The personnel strength of the Army Air Forces in 1940
stood at about 51,000. The plan proposed an expansion to 2,165,000 in
3 years, a 42-fold increase. The aircraft inventory in 1940 was about
6,000, about half of these were obsolescent combat aircraft and the rest
trainers. The plan proposed a 10-fold increase in 3 years. Further-
more, it called for production capacity to replace the combat elements
of the force (about 26,000 combat aircraft) every 5 months. The heavy
bomber component called for nearly 11,000 4 engine bombers.
Combat replacements would require 770 4—engine bombers per month
for the air offensive against Germany alone, and 416 fighters. The
Army Air Forces had received 61 4~-engine bombers in 1940. Shortly
before that, the War Department had told the Congress that the Army
needed no 4-engine bombers at all.

Although strategic air operations could begin on a limited scale
about twelve months after the outbreak of war, it was not expected
that the air offensive would be in place at full strength in England until
about eighteen months after M-—day. Thus, the full six months of
strategic air warfare would end about twenty-four months after the
outbreak of war. The invasion force should be positioned by that time.
There would ensue a period of two or three months during which the
strategic air forces could be applied in direct assault preparatory for
invasion, and the ground forces could make final preparations for
amphibious invasion, if by that time it were still necessary to storm the
coast of France. (See charts on page 117.) Even if effective German
resistance were broken by the air offensive, an occupying force would
be needed. It would keep order, support an interim government, and
ensure adherence to peace terms. The opposition to such an occupying
force might be considerable, but the enemy capacity for massive,
organized resistance should be broken by that time.

37

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 59 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

RELATIONSHIP OF STRATEGIC AIR OFFENSE
IN
PLANNING GRAND STRATEGY—WAR IN EUROPE
(VICTORY PROGRAM — AWPD-1)

BUILDING OF MERCHANT
ARMY MOBILIZATION MARINE FORCES AND
TRANSPORTATION OVERSEAS

| GROUND

COMBINED
OPER
TRAINING & ATIONS
PRODUCTION

Trang "|

AIR

gO MONTHS ao
PREPARATION = pbEPLOYMENTTO AIR

OF BASES OFFENSIVE
M DAY ENGLAND GERMANY  DDAY

9 MONTHS

The plan was completed and submitted to the War Plans Division,
WDGS, before General Arnold returned from Argentia, Newfound-
land, where he had gone with President Roosevelt and General
Marshall to meet with Prime Minister Churchill and his staff. The
plan had been checked with Robert A. Lovett, Assistant Secretary of
War for Air, at literally the eleventh hour. As a document it was not
impressive-looking—pages typed and mimeographed; pen-and-ink
corrections; charts black and white, hastily prepared and crudely
pasted together. Finally, the entire War Plans document (including
AWPD-1) was bundled off to the Government Printing Office.

The Air War Plans Division Plan No. 1 (AWPD-1) stipulated
these total force requirements:

38

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 60 ---
TOTAL AIR FORCE GROUPS REQUIRED

Heavy bombers (B—17, B—24) 47
Very heavy bombers (B—29, B—32) 24
Very long—range bombers (B—36)* 44
Fighters 54
Others (Primarily for support of ground forces) 82_
TOTAL 251

TOTAL MILITARY AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION REQUIRED
(Including unit equipment and initial reserves)

Strategic Forces

Bombers, Heavy 9,775
Heavy (B—17/24) 3,995
Very heavy (B—29/32) 2,040
Very long—range (B—36) 3,740

Fighters (escort) 2,000

TOTAL 11,775

Tactical and Air Defense Forces
eet and Air Defense Forces

Bombers Medium, Light, and Dive 3,244

Fighters 6,748

Reconnaissance Aircraft 1,917
TOTAL 11,909

Transports 1,064

TOTAL
TOTAL COMBAT AND OPERATIONAL AIRCRAFT 24,748

Trainers 37,051

TOTAL 37,051

TOTAL MILITARY AIRCRAFT 61,799

TOTAL MILITARY PERSONNEL REQUIRED 2,118,625

Once war had begun, it would be necessary to replace the combat units (Total Combat
and Operational Aircraft 24,748) every 5 months to account for combat attrition. This
‘would require production of approximately 59,400 combat aircraft per year.

*The B—36s were required in case Britain would collapse.

39

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 61 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

The plan became Annex 2, Air Requirements, of the War Department
report, which became “The Victory Program.” But the Joint Army
and Navy Board, in forwarding the full report, took scant notice of the
air plan. The board said: ‘Naval and air forces may prevent wars from
being lost, and by weakening enemy strength may contribute greatly to
victory. . . . It should be recognized as an almost invariable rule that
only land armies can finally win wars.”

Finally on August 30 we faced the crucial test. General Marshall;
W. Averell Harriman, the President’s representative to Russia;
General Arnold; Lt. Col. Muir S. Fairchild; several members of the
General Staff; William S. Knudsen of General Motors, Inc., and other
officials from war production listened to the presentation. There were
questions and some expressions of dissent. Reserving his comment
until all others had been heard, General Marshall said: “I think the
plan has merit. I should like the Secretary and Assistant Secretaries to
hear it.”” That statement by General Marshall to General Arnold
marked a crucial turning point in the evolution of American air power.
This was the moment of conception of the United States Air Force.
General Marshall was its godfather. He could so easily have said: “The
proposal is totally out of keeping with the program for the rest of the
Army. Cut it in halfl” Instead he said: “I think the plan has merit.” It
was a magnificent decision and a typical example of his towering
character.

Briefed on September 1 with General Marshall present, Secretary
of War Stimson showed a gratifying appreciation of the strategic
concept. General Marshall offered encouraging comments. At last
Stimson turned to Colonel George and said: “General Marshall and I
like the plan. I want you gentlemen to be prepared to present it to the
President.” A tentative date for the meeting and intensive preparations
for the presentation were under way, when Pearl Harbor threw all
arrangements into disarray. Loss of the opportunity to brief the
President on the detailed plans for strategic air warfare was a cruel
disappointment. It is quite likely Roosevelt’s quick intelligence would
have prompted him to make detailed inquiries, and perhaps he would

40

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 62 ---
STRATEGY, DOCTRINE, AND PLANS

have embraced the scheme with the same comprehension that
characterized the reactions of Marshall and Stimson. Missing that
presentation, the President never fully grasped the war-winning
potential of air power.

Nonetheless, AWPD-1 became the basic blueprint for the cre-
ation of the Army Air Forces and the conduct of the air war. As part
of The Victory Program it was approved for production. Since the
production quantities were derived expressly from the plan of
operations, approval for production clearly implied approval of the
scheme of operations. In the absence of other guidance, AWPD-1
became the accepted and authoritative statement of air strategy until
issuance of AWPD-42 a year later. Still, AWPD-1 was never formally
endorsed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. After the Pearl Harbor attack,
the Air War Plans Division hastened to amend AWPD-1. One
principal change was more air forces for the Pacific to help compen-
sate for the loss of U.S. capital ships. Another was to add a large
number of air transports, since it was apparent a heavy burden of
overseas communications would have to be met by air. The new
estimate was called AWPD-4, but it was not much different from
AWPD-1.

41

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 63 ---
BOMB DAMAGE TO THE BALL BEARING FACTORIES at
Schweinfurt, Germany. In attacking this vital industry, the AAF
attempted to slow down the wheels of the German war machine.

42

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 64 ---
Chapter II

Planning the Strategic
Air War for Europe

The Japanese aircraft that destroyed the U.S. Navy’s battleline at
Pearl Harbor on the morning of December 7, 1941, produced
reverberations that extended far beyond the Pacific. The attack roused
an apathetic America into a fury of resentment, resulting in a tidal
wave of emotion that swept over the carefully reasoned plans which
had been prepared to meet a war emergency. This wave of emotion
affected civilians and military alike. America had watched the
progress of the war in Europe and Far East with bemused and pacific
apprehension. Suddenly, after Pearl Harbor, there was a call for
action, and the call riveted attention on the Pacific and Far East—
upon the Japanese—not upon Hitler and his Nazis.

U.S. military planners had not been idle after the outbreak of war
in Europe. Despite the pacifists prevailing in the country, the
possibility of the United States being drawn into the conflict was very
real. The plans devised in a calmer and more logical atmosphere
specified that the initial effort be launched against Axis Europe. The
war against Japan would be restricted to the strategic defensive
pending the defeat of Hitler. Then, and only then, would America
transfer her might to the Pacific and defeat the Japanese. During the
defensive phase in the Pacific, the U.S. fleet would seek out and defeat
the Japanese fleet if the opportunity occurred. However, the primary

43

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 65 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

effort and the priority of resources would be concentrated on crushing
Hitler. .

With the loss of the battleships on December 7, meeting the
Japanese fleet on the high seas would have to be postponed. Even so,
emotions were running high and reversal of the “Europe first” strategy
and early assumption of the offensive against Japan appeared proba-
ble. The order of priority in building and deploying our forces was
likely to veer in that direction.

Following the sneak attack, the Germans damaged their cause by
promptly declaring war against the United States. Still, this act did not
stem the tide of opinion that demanded instant retaliation against
Japan in the Pacific. It was not the Germans who had attacked us—it
was the Japanese. The U.S. Navy understandingly welcomed this
public surge toward reprisal. For over a generation the Navy had
looked toward the day when it could sweep the Pacific Ocean of the
Japanese. Now it had been seriously depleted of capital ships and
patriotic men who manned them. Add to this the affront to the pride
of an organization that had built the world’s greatest fighting machine
at sea. The logic of a “Europe first” strategy seemed surely to be
overcome by the surging waves of emotion.

Almost immediately after Pearl Harbor, Prime Minister Churchill
announced his intention to come to America to join President
Roosevelt for consultations between the new Allies on combined grand
strategy. He may have sensed the American impulse to turn west
against Japan rather than east against Axis Europe in the new
situation. He announced he would bring his military staff, the Chiefs
of Staff Committee. It consisted of the Chief of the Imperial General
Staff, Sir Alan F. Brooke; the First Sea Lord, Sir Dudley Pound; and
the Chief of the Air Staff of the Royal Air Force, Air Chief Marshal
Sir Charles F. A. Portal. They would be supported by the members of
the British Joint Plans Committee and Joint Intelligence Committee.

We viewed this approaching visit with alarm and some misgiving.
The British interservice staff organization was competent and experi-
enced. As yet, we had no similar committee organizations prepared to
confer with the British. Moreover, our plans and desires were in
complete disarray as a result of Pearl Harbor.

44

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 66 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

The President met this situation by appointing the U.S. Joint
Chiefs of Staff Committee. Initially, it was to consist of the Chief of
Staff of the Army and the Chief of Naval Operations. On the initiative
of General Marshall, the President accepted General Arnold, AAF
Chief, on the committee. This would satisfy Churchill’s suggestion
that there be an American ‘“‘opposite member” to the Chief of the Air
Staff of the Royal Air Force. But Roosevelt issued no formal directive
defining General Arnold’s position. At the meetings, held between
December 22, 1941, and January 14, 1942, Arnold remained in the
background, speaking only on technical air matters.

Adm. William D. Leahy, U.S. Ambassador to France, had
recently returned to become the President’s personal Chief of Staff.
Initially he attended the meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Committee to keep Roosevelt informed of the committee’s proceedings
and discussions. Thus, he had much the same role as that of Lt. Gen.
Sir Hastings L. Ismay, Churchill’s military assistant, who attended the
meetings of the British Chiefs of Staff Committee.

The new “Joint Chiefs of Staff’ set up supporting committees.
Chief among them were Joint Plans, Joint Strategic, Joint Intelligence,
and Joint Logistics.

Joint Strategic Planning

The Joint Strategic Committee and the Joint Intelligence Commit-
tee supported the Joint Chiefs of Staff through the Joint Plans
Committee, which initially consisted of Rear Adm. Richmond K.
Turner, USN (Chairman); Col. Thomas T. Handy, USA; and Col.
Harold L. George, USAAF. Colonel George assumed command of the
Air Corps Ferrying Command in April 1942 (redesignated Air
Transport Command in June 1942). Maj. Gen. Carl Spaatz then
became the Air member, with Col. Howard A. Craig serving as his
deputy.

The functions of the Joint Strategic Committee were described in
these terms:

To prepare such strategical estimates, studies, and plans as may be

45

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 67 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

directed by the Joint Staff planners, and to initiate such studies as
the committee may deem appropriate.

The estimates and studies produced by the Joint US Intelli-
gence Committee and the Joint US Strategic Committee should
represent the considered, composite convictions of each committee.
In their studies and deliberations preliminary to committee conclu-
sions, it is intended that the members of these committees should
present their individual views regarding the matter under consider-
ation. When higher authority has reached a decision or had issued a
directive, the committee concerned will be guided accordingly.

The original membership of the Joint Strategic Committee
included:

Capt. Oliver M. Read, USN

Col. Ray T. Maddocks, USA

Capt. Bertram J. Rodgers, USN

Lt. Col. Jesmond D. Balmer, USA
Capt. Forrest P. Sherman, USN

Lt. Col. Albert C. Wedemeyer, USA
Maj. Homer L. Litzenberg, Jr.. USMC
Maj. Haywood S. Hansell, Jr.,. USAAF

On a Friday morning, I received orders reassigning me immedi-
ately from the Army Air Forces, where I was Chief of the European
Branch of the Air War Plans Division, to the War Department
General Staff Corps. I was ordered to report to the Joint Strategic
Committee at its new offices on Monday morning. As a member of
this committee, I found myself in the midst of the massive machinery
which was trying to deal with problems of worldwide proportions. I
was told that my loyalties in my new job were to be devoted to the
Joint Chiefs of Staffs and that I must divest myself of service
allegiances and all prejudices relating to one branch of the military
service.

There were only four offices for the eight members of the
committee. Each office had a large double desk at which two officers,
of different services, sat. Each desk had one “in” basket, one “out”
basket, and one “hold” basket. Every effort was made to force us into
concerted action and to divorce us from service loyalties. We were a

46

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 68 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

group of strangers, four from the War Department and four from the
Navy Department. The senior officer was Navy Captain Read. He
acted as chairman initially, but alternated with Colonel Maddocks at
the Army’s insistence.

The military beliefs of the various members of the Joint Strategic
Committee were as different as the members themselves, reflecting the
divergent backgrounds of the individuals and their training. Of the
eight committee members, I was unfortunately the only graduate of
the Air Corps Tactical School, though the school had graduated many
Army, Navy, and Marine Corps officers. I, for one, was familiar with
Air Corps doctrine which taught that wars, once entered upon, should
be won in the sense that victory should make possible the attainment
of national war aims and that victory involved overcoming the
enemy’s “will to resist” and capability to continue the fight, while
preserving one’s own. That end could be sought by:

1. Providing security for one’s own sources of power.

2. Defeating the enemy’s forces in battle.

3. Destroying (or cutting off) the war-supporting industrial structure
supplying the instruments with which the enemy fought.

4. Destroying or debilitating the industrial systems supporting both the
war-supporting and the civil-social, life-supporting vitality of the enemy
State.

5. As a last resort, destroying great numbers of the enemy people or
depriving them of the means to support themselves, particularly the masses
dwelling in the cities.

Of these options, air power might be employed to achieve 1, 3, 4, and
5, or to assist the Army and Navy in achieving 2 or 3. This Air Corps
concept obviously was not unanimously adopted by the committee. In
fact, there was no unanimity—no common ground—on which the
members of the Joint Strategic Committee might move in unison
toward recommending a joint overall strategy for the conduct of the
war.

With the exception of Colonel Wedemeyer, the members of the
Joint Strategic Committee were unaware of the Air Corps’ views on air
power and certainly were not ready to accept them. The Army

47

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 69 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

members considered that victory could come only through invasion of
the enemy’s territory and defeat of the enemy’s army. The Navy was
prepared to go along with this view, with the clear understanding that
invasion could not possibly be considered until the Navy had defeated
the enemy navy and secured the lines of communication. Thereafter,
the Navy was ready to support the amphibious assault and protect the
lines of communication—leaving the rest to the Army, supported by
the air forces. As the Air Corps member, I contended the enemy could
best be defeated by strategic air power. The Joint Strategic Committee
was treading in troubled waters. The potential of strategic air power to
be the decisive element in achieving victory continued to be disputed
until the end of the war.

We were just getting acquainted when we received our first
directive from the Joint Chiefs of Staff. As the meeting was called to
order, a burly Marine captain entered, bearing a locked and sealed
briefcase. He wore side arms and an armed guard accompanied him.
With much ceremony, he removed a message from his briefcase and
received a signed receipt. The message was from the Joint Chiefs of
Staff by way of the Joint Plans Committee. It was a masterpiece of
directness and simplicity asking in effect: “What should be the
strategic concept of the conduct of the war?” Making no reference to
previous plans or policies and making no effort to influence our views,
the message left the field wide open. This was typical of the open-
mindedness of General Marshall. Unfortunately, however, the direc-
tive furnished no statement of national purpose or national objective
of the war to serve as guidance for our formidable task. Nor did we, as
the Joint Strategic Committee, seek to interpret national attitudes and
statements of policy to serve as guidance. At our first meeting,
however, we did agree upon a sensible first step: we called upon the
Joint Intelligence Committee for a presentation of the world intelli-
gence situation.

The Joint Intelligence Committee presentation was gloomy in-
deed. All of Western Europe had become a German citadel, and
Hitler’s armies were at the gates of Moscow. The Germans had
suffered a rebuff, but this was attributed as much to the winter
weather as to Russian counterattack. The Joint Intelligence Commit-

48

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 70 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

tee estimated that Russian resistance would collapse within three
months after fighting resumed in the spring. That would be in about
six months. The Japanese were pressing relentlessly onward with no
sign of weakening. Corregidor in the Philippines might hold out for a
while, but it would simply be bypassed. The Joint Intelligence
Committee estimated that the Germans and Japanese might join
hands in the vicinity of Karachi, India, within the year. Taking note of
these facts, opinions, and predictions, we sought to evaluate them. In
our deliberations, the great question marks were the Russian Army
and the capability of Britain to hold out.

The Russian Army gave no reason for optimism. Little was
known of it, but that knowledge was hardly encouraging. Stalin had
killed off great numbers of the professional military in the purges of
the 1930s. Thereafter, the Russians had instituted the commissar
system, whereby every military commander had a Party member at his
elbow. This new Russian Army had not fared well against the very
small adversary of Finland in 1939 and 1940. Rumor indicated the
Communists had then abandoned the commissar system. Later,
however, we learned this was not true. The Soviets were extremely
secretive and treated their Allies as potential enemies.

The great Russian Army had permitted itself to suffer the
disastrous effects of surprise the previous summer when Hitler had
unleashed 163 divisions against them on June 22, 1941. How the
Germans could amass 163 divisions on the Russian border without
alerting the Russians to their danger remains a mystery. Actually
Stalin had been warned, both by the British and by his own agents.
The summer campaign of 1941 by the Germans had produced one of
the wonders of military history. Using bold tactics of wide envelop-
ment and deep penetration by Gen. Heinz Guderian’s armored forces,
closely supported by the Luftwaffe, the Germans cut out huge chunks
of Russia. By following up with foot soldiers moving forward at an
amazing pace, the Germans simply ingested over a million Russian
prisoners at a rate which surely taxed the prisoner-of-war facilities to
the utmost.

In the winter of 1941-1942, the hope of continued Russian
resistance on any major scale seemed dim indeed. If Russian resistance

49

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 71 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

faded away, what then? Numerous Germans would be released for
redeployment against the British. The British had preserved their
security through the Battle of Britain. But it was problematical that
Britain could succeed a second time. With the European industry
available for producing new armaments, the deficiencies leading to the
defeat of the Luftwaffe in the Battle of Britain could be corrected.
Heavier bombers and longer-range escort fighters might accomplish
what the He-111 bombers and the Me-109 fighters failed to do. The
submarine campaign might be extended until it did indeed starve
Britain into submission or accommodation. Then all would be lost,
and America would face either the extension of German power into
South America, or the prospect of an uneasy peace subjecting the vast
resources and markets of Europe to German exploitation. But what
could be done about it? More specifically, what could the United
States do about it?

The Victory Program* had shown it would take two years to raise
the armies and build ships to transport them to Europe for massive
combined invasion of Fortress Europe, even if the British were able to
survive and persist. Two years seemed quite hopeless.

We had been spared the agony of deciding whether to go to war.
The Japanese had made that decision for us. But the Joint Strategic
Committee would have been well advised to preface its deliberations
with a determination of national purpose and national military
objectives. The first was, unfortunately, ignored. The latter was
commonly agreed to be “victory over our enemies.” The victory must
be so convincing as to permit our statesmen and political leaders to set
whatever course was best for the postwar world.

The committee faced two options in terms of national grand
strategy: (1) strategic offensive against Axis Europe and strategic
defensive against Japan; (2) strategic defensive of the Western
Hemisphere and strategic offensive against Japan. The committee

*The response by the Secretaries of War and Navy to the President’s letter of July 9, asking
for “estimates of production required to defeat our potential enemies” was called The Victory
Program, of which AWPD-1 was Annex II. After Pearl Harbor only the Air Plan, AWPD-1,
remained feasible to accomplish in the new situation.

50

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 72 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

further faced several options in terms of military force application,
whether there should be primary emphasis on invasion, or sea
blockade, or strategic air attack, or a combination of the three. Earlier,
Roosevelt and Churchill had clearly favored a joint offensive in
Europe as a first priority. But this was before the catastrophe of Pearl
Harbor and the proximate defeat of Soviet Russia. At this point, the
Joint Strategic Committee felt free to make a new military appraisal.
In fact, the committee looked upon this as a requirement in view of the
directive from the Joint Chiefs.

The direction most of the members of the committee would favor
soon became evident. If the salvation of Europe was hopeless, then it
would be stupid to waste resources on a doomed venture and leave the
Japanese undisturbed while they consolidated their expanding areas of
conquest. In short, insofar as grand strategy was concerned, the
majority of the committee tended toward option (2)—strategic
defensive of the Western Hemisphere and strategic offensive against
Japan, abandoning Europe as hopelessly lost. As to military force
application, the Navy wanted primary emphasis on defense of the
Western Hemisphere by the Navy and gaining naval domination of the
Pacific. Ultimately, this meant gaining sea superiority in the critical
areas vital to Japan and finally supporting an invasion. Army members
stoutly contended that invasion, whether in Europe or Japan, was the
decisive maneuver for victory.

I was the proponent of air power as the chief instrument of
victory. Although my interests included air defense and air support of
surface operations, they centered on strategic air warfare. And I was
not prepared to write off Europe as already lost. There were many
principal ways to apply air power. (We do not need to go into them
here as they pertained to the air war against Germany. They are
described elsewhere.) The significant point was that a Nazi victory in
Europe would create a condition wherein we could not sustain a
prosperous life in peace. Acknowledging this, authorities at the very
highest levels had already approved the offensive against Germany as
our main effort. To this end, our first military effort was an air
offensive, as described in AWPD-1. Regardless of how black the
picture looked, we simply had to do our utmost to save Europe to save

31

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 73 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

ourselves. In defense of my position, therefore, I briefed the committee
in detail on the air plan, which proposed first priority on a sustained
and unremitting air bombardment of Germany from English bases.

The purpose of the air offensive was (1) to debilitate the German
war machine through destruction of war industries and undermine the
“will to resist’’ of the German state by selective bombing, (2) topple
the German state if possible, and (3) prepare for support of an
invasion, if that should be necessary. More specifically, AWPD-1
called for the operation of 1,060 medium bombers (B—25s and B—26s),
3,740 heavy and very heavy bombers (B-17s, B—24s, and B—29s), and
2,000 fighters against Germany from bases in England, Northern
Ireland, and Egypt. In addition, 3,740 very-long-range bombers
(B—36s) would operate from bases in the Western Hemisphere. There
would be 6 months of intensive and undiluted bombardment of 154
selected industrial targets:

German Air Force 30
German electric power system 50
German petroleum system 27
German transportation system _47

154

The primary air objectives were described in some detail with regard
to Axis Europe; they were less definitive as to Japan.

Days and nights of bitter but earnest arguments ensued within the
committee. The weight of committee sentiment and conviction
gravitated steadily to the Pacific. Committee members had spent their
professional lives studying military history, and most were inclined to
accept a strict interpretation of the Joint Army and Navy Board’s
precept expressed in September 1941, in The Victory Program: ‘“‘Naval
and air power may prevent wars from being lost and, by weakening
enemy strength, may greatly contribute to victory. By themselves,
however, naval and air forces seldom, if ever, win important wars. It
should be recognized as an almost invariable rule that only land
armies can finally win wars.” Invasion of Europe by land armies
before the collapse of Russia appeared a very remote possibility.

52

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 74 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

Growing impatient, the Joint Chiefs of Staff sent a message
demanding an answer to their question. Colonel Wedemeyer and I
favored a grand strategy of Axis Europe first, even though the
prospects of victory in Europe looked very grim indeed. A head count
showed that nearly all our committee members, three-fourths in fact,
were for abandoning Europe as beyond salvation and for constructing
a defense of the Western Hemisphere and an offense against Japan as
soon as forces, especially naval ones, could be provided. They were
ready to acknowledge the loss of Europe and Britain as a hopeless
cause and assume the offensive against Japan at the earliest possible
time, culminating in the invasion and conquest of the Japanese home
islands.

I was motivated by a number of convictions to turn our maximum
effort to the defeat of Hitler. A year’s study as head of the Strategic
Air Intelligence Section of A—2 led me to a firm belief that Germany
was susceptible to defeat from the air. I had estimated and evaluated
the force requirements to achieve this aim. I knew the air offensive
would not have to be delayed two years; it could begin in the near
future and reach massive proportions in a little over a year and a half if
it were accorded top priority. I knew base areas could be furnished in
Britain. And a tour in England as an observer of the war convinced me
Britain would fight and go on fighting so long as there was one ray of
hope. We could supply that ray.

I also felt that victory over Hitler was essential to America’s
future well-being. Failure to preserve Europe could produce a
situation in which a Nazi-dominated Europe could become too strong
for our economic competition or our military security. This was not so
for the Far East. Failure to thwart Emperor Hirohito of Japan would
lead to discomfort but not disaster. Colonel Wedemeyer also believed
that we should do everything in our power to defeat Hitler and save
Europe. He, too, felt that a Europe dominated and exploited by Hitler
could prove to be a disaster for the future of America.

Together we persuaded our associates. The recommended grand
strategy sent to the Joint Chiefs through the Joint Plans Committee
envisioned a strategic offensive against Axis Europe as the maximum
national effort until Nazi Germany was decisively defeated. Concur-

53

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 75 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

rently, there would be strategic defensive operations in the Pacific with
the least diversion of available forces from the main thrust against
Hitler. An all-out strategic offensive would be launched against Japan
immediately after Hitler’s defeat. The initial mode of offensive
operations against Axis Europe would be through a combined
strategic air offensive by the Royal Air Force and the U.S. Army Air
Forces from bases in England. It would be directed against the
German Air Force and the war-making and civic-sustaining resources
of the German state. Preparations for an invasion of the Continent and
sustained and combined air and surface warfare would be provided.
Massive tactical air forces to support ground operations would be
made ready in time. The proponents of strategic air warfare hoped an
invasion would not be needed, but Allied grand strategy could not be
pinned to that hope alone.

This grand strategy was accepted by the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff
and was formally accepted by the Combined Chiefs of Staff on
December 31, 1941. The agreement contained the following para-
graph:

The essential features of the American-British Strategy as
adopted by the Combined Chiefs of Staff on December 31, 1941,
based on the principle that only the minimum of force necessary for
the safeguarding of vital interests in other theaters should be
diverted from operation against Germany, were:

(a) The realization of the victory programs of armaments,
which first and foremost requires the security of the main areas of
war industry.

(b) The maintenance of essential communications.
(c) Closing and tightening the ring around Germany.

(d) Wearing down and undermining German resistance by air
bombardment, blockade, subversive activities, and propaganda.

(e) The continuous development of offensive action against
Germany.

(f) Maintaining only such positions in the Eastern theater as
will safeguard vital interests and deny to Japan access to raw
materials vital to her continuous war effort while we are concentrat-
ing on defeat of Germany.

54

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 76 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

It is interesting to note that the Combined Chiefs of Staff
recognized that defensive security of the sources of power, the main
areas of population, and war industry, must be ensured before any
_ offensive operations could be sustained.

One would expect this would settle the dichotomy over early
offensive against Japan, but this was not so. The U.S. Navy was not
content with a defensive role and demanded the acceptance of a
“limited active defense” against Japan, with forces assigned for this
purpose. Specifically, Navy officials wanted a U.S. Army strategic air
force assigned to support naval forces in the South Pacific. The crux of
the disagreement focused on communications between Hawaii and
Australia. I demurred against furnishing a strategic air force to the
Pacific which would compete with requirements for Europe. Nonethe-
less, the other committee members agreed with the Navy’s contention
that the line of communication to Australia through New Zealand was
vital to the war effort, and there must be provided a mobile air force of
long-range aircraft to operate with the mobile naval surface forces.
The idea was appealing and had merit—if we had forces to support it.

I agreed that the area was important but could not agree that a
long-range air force should be provided for operations in that area.
Actually, we had no long-range air forces at all. The Eighth Air Force
was to be organized for deployment to England at the earliest possible
moment. But it was not even in existence. We were short of long-range
bombers and trained crews, and we were straining to form such an air
force for the air offensive against Axis Europe. To set up another long-
range air force for operations in the South Pacific would dilute our
sparse resources beyond recognition. This was the first of many
efforts—some of them all too successful—to divert long-range bomb-
ers from their agreed first priority job: the attack on Germany.

The request by the Navy for creation of an Army Air Forces
strategic air force to be deployed to the South Pacific to operate under
naval command was approved by the majority of the members of the
Joint Strategic Committee. This was, I suspect, the first “split-paper”
submitted to the Joint Chiefs, and they were not pleased. Delivering an
official admonition to our committee to be recorded on the personal
record of each member, they directed us to reconvene and come up

55

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 77 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

with an agreed recommendation. General Arnold called me in and
gave me a “personal admonition” to go on my record.

We reconvened in continuous session. Colonel Wedemeyer, who
had always inclined to a “Europe first” strategy, recognized the
danger in setting up a competing demand for a strategic air force in the
South Pacific. He joined me and we worked as a team. Little by little
the others came around—the Navy members most reluctantly.
Finally, we came to agreement on the need for concentrating forces for
the chief effort against Axis Europe with a minimum of diversion
elsewhere. We submitted our unanimous findings, which were accept-
ed. I rather thougnt General Arnold would remove the record of my
personal admonition, since I had won my point, and I am sure he
would have if he had thought of it. But apparently it did not occur to
him.

I do not think it wise to make too much of these incidents. I doubt
if the Joint Chiefs would have endorsed the recommendation first
favored by the majority of our committee—abandoning Europe as
irrevocably lost and turning our energies to defeat of Japan. But it is
possible they might have. President Roosevelt and Prime Minister
Churchill would certainly have overridden any recommendation to
that effect. Yet, if Germany had not declared war on the United States
so promptly, the President would have had to face alone the wave of
anger against Japan. I think it quite possible that, under those
circumstances, our main effort might have been in the Pacific. The
incidents have, I think, two points of significance.

First, if Germany’s declaration of war against the United States
had been omitted entirely or had been delayed, Churchill would have
found it difficult to arrange for immediate conversations on British-
American grand strategy on a worldwide basis. And it would have
been difficult for him to bring the Chiefs of Staff Committee and their
supporting committees with him. Since there would have been no
immediate need for a U.S. air member to balance the Chief of Staff of
the Royal Air Force, it is quite likely the initial composition of the
USS. Joint Chiefs of Staff Gif such a committee were appointed at all)
would have embraced only the Chief of Staff of the Army and the
Chief of Naval Operations, together with the President’s personal

56

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 78 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

Chief of Staff. Without air membership, the U.S. Joint Chiefs in their
deliberations on grand strategy would have embraced the argument
that Britain could not be saved by surface warfare, and they would
probably have endorsed the decision to abandon support of Britain as
infeasible and to make defeat of Japan the primary American military
objective.

Second, the Navy never really abandoned its adherence to the
concept that equal priority should go to the war in the Pacific—to the
defeat of Japan. By the time the final plans for invasion of the Japanese
home islands were approved in 1945, the Navy had completed an
enormous armada in the Pacific, including 10 new battleships and 13
rebuilt old ones and 109 aircraft carriers of assorted sizes. Nearly all of
these ships had been committed or laid down in 1942 and 1943. They
had enjoyed equal priority with the needs and demands of the Army
and the Army Air Forces for new armaments, even though these
resources were destined for the secondary, defensive effort in the
Pacific, not to the principal offensive against Axis Europe. The
enormous carrier force was equipped with multiple aircraft comple-
ments and combat crews for each carrier. These, too, shared equally in
resources with the Army Air Forces, which were committed to the top
priority strategic effort against Axis Europe. No one will deny the
magnificent performance of these forces in the Pacific. But their
production schedule was not in accord with the agreed joint strategy,
and it competed with and jeopardized the buildup of forces for the
chief effort.

My tenure with the Joint Strategic Committee was not long. In
May, Maj. Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower asked me to head an air plans
office in the European Theater of Operations, and in June I went to
England where he promoted me to brigadier general. My replacement
on the Joint Strategic Committee was Col. Earle E. “Pat” Partridge. I
went from that job to command a wing and an air division in Eighth
Air Force.

AWPD-42

In August 1942 the President again asked for an estimate

37

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 79 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

involving aircraft. He wanted to know the number of military
airplanes that should be produced in 1943 to attain air supremacy. I
was temporarily called back from England to direct preparation of a
new air plan (AWPD-42). Air War Plans Division-1 (AWPD-1),
written in September 1941, had been a “contingency plan,” in case we
should go to war. But AWPD-42 was essentially a “requirements”
plan specifying munitions, bases, and air needs to carry out an agreed
strategy. This time the requirements would include aircraft for our
allies as well as ourselves, since we continued to want the wherewithal
to conduct significant air operations. AWPD-—42 retained the basic
structure of AWPD-1. The defeat of Germany remained the first
priority and the air offensive against Japan was still deferred.
Unchanged was the primary strategic purpose of undermining and
destroying the capability and will of Germany to wage war. This
would be done by destroying the war-supporting industries and
economic systems upon which the war-sustaining and political econo-
my depended.
The air operations contemplated for 1943 and 1944 were:

1. An air offensive against Axis Europe to:
a. Defeat the German Air Force.
b. Destroy the sources of German submarine construction.
c. Undermine the German war-making capacity.

2. Air support of an Allied land offensive in Northwest Africa.

3. Air support of Allied nations’ land operations to retain the Middle
East.

4. Air support of surface operations in the Japanese Theater to regain
base areas for a final offensive against Japan proper, including:
a. Land operations from India through China, reopening the
Burma Road.
b. Amphibious operations from the South and Southwest Pacific
toward the Philippine Islands.

5. Hemispheric defense, including antisubmarine patrol.

The air objectives were described as primary and intermediate,
with overriding priority given to the intermediate ones:

58

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 80 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

(German) Fighter aircraft assembly plants
Bomber aircraft assembly plants
Aero engine assembly plants

The primary ones were:

(German) Submarine yards
Transportation targets (rail and canal in Germany)
Electric power system
Synthetic oil plants
Aluminum plants
Synthetic rubber plants

When inaugurated, the strategic offensive against Japan would
resemble that for Germany. It would seek to undermine and destroy
the capability and will of the Japanese people to wage war by
destroying the industries and systems upon which the war industries
and the civilian economy relied.

In comparison with operations and priorities called for in
AWPD-1, worldwide operations revealed by 1942 some weakening of
resolve to keep the maximum possible air strength directed toward the
primary strategic air offensive, the destruction of the vital elements of
Germany. Northwest Africa was drawing off air forces to support land
operations. Land operations in the Middle East were likewise diverting
air elements. And surface operations to regain base areas in the Far
East, as distinct from operations for a strictly defensive purpose, were
also absorbing air power. By necessity, all these absorbed air forces
could have been employed in the primary strategic effort, the air
offensive against Germany. Yet the latter had not even started in any
meaningful sense, and the delay would be further extended if these
diversions continued to grow.

As for the air offensive against Japan, it was too early to give
anything more than general guidance in terms of objectives and
targets. Nevertheless, AWPD-42 recognized that the strategic air
offensive against Japan would follow the defeat of Germany, and
proposed the following targets:

59

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 81 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Aircraft engine plants
Submarine yards

Naval and commercial bases
Alumina and aluminum plants
Iron and steel

Oil

Chemical plants

Rubber factories

There were two striking omissions from this list: the Japanese
electric power system and the transportation system (including
shipping, harbor and repair facilities, inland seas transportation routes
and waterways, and railroads). The omission of the electric power
system stemmed from the cursory analysis by A—2. This fostered the
general belief that electric power was produced in a multiplicity of
small hydroelectric generating plants which would render the system
as a whole practically invulnerable to attack. The analysis had not
been made in depth and did not include the distribution system.
However, there was ample time for a further detailed examination, and
failure to conduct it was a costly error.

The total approved aircraft production requirements for the Army
Air Forces, the U.S. Navy, and our allies came to 127,000, of which
85,300 would go to the Army Air Forces.

Distressing Diversions

The first threat to the air offensive against Germany came
distressingly soon. Prime Minister Churchill vigorously advocated an
invasion of North Africa. It would have to be supported with heavy
bombers at the expense of the air offensive against Germany. The
American Joint Chiefs took the position that an invasion of North
Africa was militarily unwise. As General Marshall pointed out, it was
a tangential thrust, at right angles to the proper axis of attack—the
assault of Germany itself. The North African invasion would swallow
up vast military resources at the expense of the principal effort, while
doing very little toward defeating the Reich in Europe. General
Arnold vigorously supported this position with special stress on the
cost to the strategic air offensive against interior Germany. Adm.

60

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 82 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

Ernest J. King, Chief of Naval Operations, believed the margin of
priority of Germany over Japan was very small and any diversion of
resources away from Germany should go to the Pacific, not to the
Mediterranean.

President Roosevelt weighed both the military arguments against
diversion to North Africa and the political arguments calling for some
visible evidence of military success. The air offensive against Germany
was not well enough understood to meet political demands, nor were
its true dimensions really grasped by the President. Invasion of France
was out of the question in 1942 and probably in 1943. At this point
(mid—1942), both the British and the Americans had only a string of
stinging defeats—except for the defensive Battle of Britain—to show
for their war efforts. Churchill was coming under increasing political
attack at home, and his possible political defeat would be a dreadful
disaster. The Prime Minister’s arguments for operations in North
Africa and the Mediterranean had two longer range objectives: freeing
the sea lanes through the Mediterranean to India and Australia, and
adoption of a main thrust toward Germany by way of the Balkans and
the “soft underbelly.” Such a push would run interference against the
Russian drive that might engulf all of Western Europe. The President
agreed to the North African venture.

The Air War against Axis Europe

The problems of grand strategy plagued Brig. Gen. Ira C. Eaker
from the day in February 1942, when he and his small advanced staff
of six people landed in England and set up the VIII Bomber
Command, Eighth Air Force. Eaker lacked a clear, authoritative,
written statement of purpose. What was the VIII Bomber Command
expected to accomplish? What was the grand objective? Where did
that grand objective fit into the scheme of international purposes? Did
American air power have an independent but coordinate task to
accomplish, or was it a supporting element, paving the way for and
assisting the decisive campaigns of the ground forces? What was to be
the relationship between VIII Bomber Command and RAF Bomber

61

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 83 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Command, and between VIII Bomber Command and the U.S. Theater
Commander?

Eaker himself understood well enough the objective General
Arnold had in mind, from the latter’s verbal instructions. But he had
no written directive or letter of instructions describing his purpose and
giving him the authority to pursue it. The VIII Bomber Command
Commander had been a supporter and disciple of Billy Mitchell. He
had attended the Air Corps Tactical School, where Mitchell’s broad
concepts had been translated into specific concepts and principles. He
had also been thoroughly briefed on AWPD-1, the plan for the
development of the Army Air Forces and their operations in the
European Theater. As mentioned earlier, that plan expressed the
objective of U.S. Army Air Forces in a war against the European Axis
Powers in these terms: “To conduct a sustained and unremitting air
offensive against Germany and Italy to destroy their will and
capability to continue the war and to make an invasion either
unnecessary or feasible without excessive cost.” The primary targets
were listed as the disruption of Germany’s electric power system,
transportation system, and petroleum system. The German Air Force,
especially the German fighter force, might make it excessively
expensive to make deep penetration to reach these primary targets.
Hence, the German fighter force was described as an intermediate
objective and given an “overriding priority,” even higher than the
primary targets whose destruction was expected to cripple the German
state and its ability to continue the war. Neutralization of the German
fighter force would have the added value of being absolutely essential
to any consideration of invasion. To accomplish this aim, AWPD-1
specified building Eighth Air Force to 10 groups of medium bombers
(850 B-25s and B-26s), 20 groups of heavy bombers (1,360 B—17/
B-24s) based in England, 12 groups of very heavy bombers (816
B-29s) based in Northern Ireland, and 10 groups of fighters (1,300
P-47s and P-38s) based in England—a total of 4,328 aircraft,

62

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 84 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

including unit reserves.* Clearly this was a concept of air power
coordinate with any other forces, land or sea, and designed to have a
war-winning role in Allied grand strategy. Obviously the Eighth Air
Force would have to establish and maintain its individual identity and
integrity if it was to perform such a role.

Eaker subscribed to this concept wholeheartedly and he never
swerved from it. But AWPD-1 had been prepared before Pearl
Harbor and had been approved by the President solely as part of the
Victory Program, as a guide for production. When the Joint Chiefs of
Staff organization was created in late December 1941, the Chiefs
refused to approve AWPD-1 as a basis for strategic operations. The
Navy particularly objected, saying the plan dealt with matters
important to the Navy, but that Navy officers had not participated in
its development. Furthermore, Pearl Harbor had radically changed
the situation.

On January 13, 1942, the Joint Chiefs did approve dispatching a
bomber force to England to join with RAF Bomber Command in
attacks on the European Axis. On January 27 the Combined Chiefs
agreed that the first two U.S. heavy bomber groups available were to
be assigned to an American bomber command in the British Isles, to
“operate independently in cooperation with the British Bomber
Command.”

Arnold probably had no authority to issue Eaker a “Letter of
Instructions” to prepare to implement AWPD-1. Had Arnold made
an issue of it at the time he most likely would have lost. What he may
have told Eaker in private has not been disclosed, but there was no

*The number of groups and aircraft were later described in AWPD-42 (August 1942) as:
heavy bombers, 42 (2,016); medium bombers, 15 (960); fighters, 25 (2,500). Unit reserves would
boost these totals an estimated additional 50 percent: 3,024 heavy bombers, 1,440 medium
bombers, and 3,750 fighters in the theater. These changes reflected the decision to rely upon the
continued security of bases in England. (AWPD-1 provided for the substitution of B—-17s and
B-24s for the B-36s in order to meet the contingency of the loss of England as a base area.) In
AWPD-42 the B-29s were also replaced with B-17s and B—24s, since these bombers had
adequate range to reach the targets in Germany, and the long-range B—-29s, when they became
available, would be needed in the Pacific. It also reflected the transfer of fighters from the air
defenses of the Western Hemisphere. (Most of these fighters were transferred to the Tactical Air
Forces, where they became excellent fighter-bombers). The total number of aircraft to be based
in England became 8,214, including unit reserves.

63

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 85 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

need to explain intentions. Arnold, Spaatz, and Eaker had worked
together for twenty years to develop air power. They understood each
other. Probably Arnold was wise in waiting until he had deployed this
massive force to England before raising the issue of grand strategy. As
it was, officially he told Eaker to go to England to study RAF Bomber
Command operations and to prepare the way for reception of U.S.
bomber units.

When Eaker arrived in England in early February 1942, he
reported to the Commanding General, U.S. Army Forces in British
Isles, Maj. Gen. James E. Chaney, an Air Corps officer. Chaney had
received no special instructions regarding Eaker and proposed to
quarter Eaker in his theater headquarters, staffed chiefly by ground
officers, and to exercise command over him like all other U.S. Army
elements in England. Eaker needed all his tact and ingenuity to avoid
being absorbed. He succeeded in evading this fate by seeking
headquarters near RAF Bomber Command, thirty miles outside
London, in order to carry out his instructions from Arnold.

But there Eaker encountered his second major problem. Air
Marshal Sir Arthur Harris, Commander in Chief, RAF Bomber
Command, was the soul of hospitality, but he was bent upon having
the American bombers join Bomber Command in night operations
against German cities. This threatened the absorption of VIII Bomber
Command into RAF Bomber Command and the abandonment of the
American strategic air concept of selective target destruction, which
required daylight operations so as to distinguish and attack specific
targets. It was here Eaker displayed his remarkable talent for
“amicable disagreement.”” He and Harris became and remained fast
friends. But Eaker steadfastly refused to accept Harris’ urgent
recommendations and appeals.

When Generals Eisenhower and Spaatz arrived in England on
June 24, 1942, to be the U.S. European Theater Commander and the
Commanding General, Eighth Air Force, respectively, each carried a
“Letter of Instructions.” Spaatz had received verbal instructions from
Arnold and the letter, signed by Arnold, was brief, dealing exclusively
with channels of communication. Eisenhower’s letter, more detailed,
constituted the real directive under which all U.S. Army units in

64

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 86 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

England, including the AAF, were to operate in the United Kingdom.
All air units initially based there were to be integrated into the Eighth
Air Force. General Spaatz, as commander, was to have his own
headquarters and staff, and provision was to be made for bomber,
fighter, ground-air support, and air service commands. Eisenhower’s
letter talked about strategic control of AAF operations vested in the
British government and expressed through Air Chief Marshal Portal,
RAF, as agreed by the Combined Chiefs of Staff. It was assumed the
instructions to Eisenhower meant general strategic directives on
purposes and broad objectives. His instructions did not include
designation of targets or tactical control of operations. The broad
objective for the AAF in the European Theater of Operations was
described in the letter. It was to gain air supremacy over western
continental Europe in preparation for and support of a combined land,
sea, and air movement across the channel into continental Europe.

The letter made no mention of a place for air power in grand
strategy and gave no strategic objective or list of strategic targets save
for gaining air superiority to prepare for and support an invasion of
the Continent. Nor were there any instructions to Eisenhower to offer
support for a strategic air offensive. No authority for strategic air
decisions was specially vested in General Spaatz as Commander of the
Eighth Air Force. As executive agent of the Combined Chiefs of Staff,
Air Chief Marshal Portal exercised broad strategic direction. Final
authority rested with General Eisenhower as theater commander,
commanding all U.S. Army forces in the European Theater of
Operations.

Spaatz and Eaker had no overriding authority or responsibility for
directing the strategic air offensive of the Eighth Air Force, except as
they were able to assume such authority by persuasion. Fortunately
they were both able, persuasive commanders, but their freedom of
action was limited and could be withdrawn at the discretion of the
theater commander. Thus the prospects for an effective American
strategic air offensive seemed dim, even if the forces promised for
England should arrive on schedule and should not be diverted. When
Eisenhower departed the European Theater to become commander in

65

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 87 ---
. 2

MAJ. GEN. HENRY H. ARNOLD. Chief of the AAF, (center)
meets with his staff to plan war strategy, ca. fall 1941. Staff
members include: (left to right) Col. Edgar P. Sorenson; Lt. Col.
Harold L. George; Brig. Gen. Carl Spaatz, Chief of Staff; Maj.
Haywood S. Hansell, Jr.; Brig. Gen. Martin F. Scanlon; and Lt.
Col. Arthur W. Vanaman.

AAF COL. STANLEY T. WRAY, Commander, 91st Bomb
Group; Maj. Gen. George E. Stratemeyer, Chief of Air Staff,
Headquarters, AAF; and Brig. Gen. Hansell, Commander, Ist
Bomb Wing, attend a dedication ceremony at Bassingbourn,
England, in April 1943.

66

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 88 ---
BRIG. GEN.
HANSELL listens
to Maj. Gen. Fol-
lett Bradley, AAF
Air Inspector, dur-
ing a visit to 305th
Bomb Group,
Chelveston, Eng-
land, on May 21,
1943.

BRITISH AIR CHIEF MARSHAL SIR ARTHUR HARRIS
(left) meets with Lt. Gen. Frank M. Andrews, Commanding
General of U.S. Forces in the European Theater, and Maj. Gen.
Ira C. Eaker, Commanding General, Eighth Air Force, on March
25, 1943.

67

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 89 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

chief of the forces invading North Africa, he took Spaatz with him—
and more than half of Eaker’s bombers as well.

Late in 1942, Maj. Gen. Muir S. Fairchild was a member of the
prestigious Strategic Survey Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that
supplanted the Joint Strategic Committee. The committee was charged
with examining the progress of and recommending changes in the
grand strategy that had been formulated by the Joint Strategic
Committee. General Fairchild was disturbed by attacks being made on
the air strategy proposed in AWPD-42. He discovered that the Joint
Intelligence Committee, containing no air member, was challenging
the validity of the basic strategic airpower contention. Specifically, the
committee questioned the effect on the outcome of the war of the
destruction of industrial targets. Fairchild therefore proposed that a
group of top U.S. industrial leaders be assembled to assess the impact
of destruction of selected targets upon industrial production. His idea
was to look at the primary targets listed in AWPD-42 and assess the
impact of their destruction. He also proposed to list industrial targets,
in priority, whose destruction would contribute most to the collapse of
the German capability and willingness to continue the war.

During the first week of December 1942, General Arnold
(without reference to the Air War Plans Division) sent Fairchild’s
draft proposal to Col. Byron E. Gates, head of the Office of
Management Control. Arnold’s memorandum read:

Have the group of operations analysts under your control
prepare and submit to me a report analyzing the rate of progressive
deterioration that could be anticipated in the German war effort as
a result of the increasing air operations we are prepared to employ
against its sustaining sources. This study should result in as
accurate an estimate as can be arrived at as to the date [emphasis
added] when the deterioration will have progressed to a point to
permit successful invasion of Western Europe.

68

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 90 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

The emphasis upon invasion is significant, and was a source of
some confusion to the Committee of Operations Analysts.

Meantime, the issue of incorporating U.S. bombers into RAF
night operations continued to boil. The issue was not confined to RAF
Bomber Command. Although Air Marshal Harris did not personally
refer the matter to the British Air Ministry, the latter took strong
opposition to General Eaker’s daylight operational concept. Eaker was
caught between two millstones. Over his bitter protest he had lost his
most experienced and effective bomber groups to the North African
campaign. Then the very people who had robbed him were castigating
him unmercifully for failing to undertake effective air operations
against Germany. Unfortunately, the criticism was just as caustic
from the United States as from the Air Ministry. Whereupon that
most powerful and persuasive personality, Winston Churchill, Prime
Minister of England, entered the fray.

In early 1943, at the Casablanca Conference of the Allied heads of
State and the Combined Chiefs of Staff, Churchill protested the Eighth
Air Force daylight bombing at a luncheon with the President. He
secured Roosevelt’s tentative agreement that the Eighth should be
directed to abandon the American air strategy of selective target
attacks and join RAF Bomber Command in night operations against
German cities. When General Arnold learned of it, he sent for Ira
Eaker, now a major general and Eighth Air Force Commander since
Spaatz departed to join General Eisenhower in the Mediterranean
Theater. Arnold explained the situation. Eaker for once lost his
customary aplomb. He told General Arnold that if he, Arnold, was
prepared to abandon his objective and adopt an air strategy that could
neither paralyze Germany’s war-making industry nor make feasible an
invasion, he, Eaker, wanted no part of it, and Arnold could find
another air commander. Arnold grinned and said he had anticipated
such a response and had arranged a meeting between Eaker and
Churchill two days hence, to see if the Eighth Air Force Commander
could dissuade the Prime Minister.

69

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 91 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Eaker sequestered himself with his aide, Captain James Parton,
and prepared his argument. He knew that Churchill preferred brevity;
like most high officials he had neither time nor patience to wade
through lengthy documents. The first draft of the digested arguments
prepared by the two totaled some twenty-three pages. Eaker then
called upon his skill of exposition, a natural talent sharpened by a year
of law at Columbia University. The final draft consisted of eight
simple, declarative assertions, filling half a page.

On the occasion of his momentous meeting with Prime Minister
Churchill, General Eaker said he understood that the Prime Minister
was always willing to weigh both sides of an issue, and he had
prepared a brief paper. Churchill read the statements slowly and with
evident relish at their pithy clarity. Eaker then had the opportunity to
explain and expand his arguments. He raised no criticism of night
bombing by the RAF, but argued that it would fit in with the daylight
bombing by the Eighth Air Force to provide continuous pressure.
“We'll bomb the devils day and night and give them no rest.” At the
conclusion of the meeting Churchill said:

Young man, you have not yet convinced me you are right, but
you have persuaded me that you should have further opportunity to
prove your contention. How fortuitous it would be if we could, as
you say, “bomb the devils around the clock.” When I see your
President at lunch today, I shall tell him that I withdraw my
suggestion that U.S. bombers join the RAF in night bombing, and
that I now recommend that our joint day and night bombing be
continued for a time.

It was, I believe, one of the most critical decisions of the war. If
Prime Minister Churchill’s recommendation had stood, if Eaker’s
argument had not been persuasive, the results would have entailed:

a. Standing down the Eighth Air Force for modifying equipment
and retraining. The B-17s and B-24s would need to be shielded
against exposing exhaust and supercharger turbine light for night
operations. That would have been quite difficult because they used
exhaust gas turbines to drive their superchargers and the light would

70

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 92 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

have been quite prominent at night. Most of the guns and gunners
would require removal, since they would be relatively useless at night.

b. The navigators would need training for higher expertise in
celestial navigation.

c. The bombardiers would require retraining for night bombing.

d. The bombardment aircraft would need British navigation and
position equipment (Gee and Oboe) pending refinement and provision
of American H2X radar bombing equipment.

e. Provision would have to be made for night landing of large
forces and for prevention of collision in congested air space being used
by both forces.

But most important of all, it would have entailed abandonment of
American grand strategy and a radical change in air strategy.
Americans were convinced that solely by destruction of selected vital
target systems could German war-making and war-sustaining capabili-
ty be wrecked. Certainly the German Air Force could not be
eliminated by night bombing; hence there could be no invasion. And
the night attack of German cities might prove insufficient to cause
German capitulation, as seemed probable in the view of American air
strategists. If so, victory in Europe might elude the Allies, and the
objectives of grand strategy would probably be lost entirely if this
change in air strategy were adopted. It is even likely American
strategic air priority would have shifted to the Pacific.

It was, in my opinion, the crucial turning point in the conduct of
the war in Europe. Its outcome hung upon the convictions and the
persuasiveness of Ira Eaker. He gambled his career that this was one of
“the things that can be changed and should be changed,” and ultimate
success proved his wisdom. It was a testimonial to Eaker’s forthright
and courageous support of strategic purpose and objective. He
succeeded in persuading the Prime Minister to reverse himself on a
position that Churchill had emphatically endorsed and had committed
himself to the President. Eaker’s gift for “amicable disagreement and
persuasion” never stood him in greater service. And in the process he
earned the admiration and respect of the Prime Minister. It was a
magnificent achievement.

71

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 93 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

The Casablanca Directive

The Casablanca Conference of January 1943 brought forth
another signal accomplishment: the Casablanca Directive for the
prosecution of the Combined Bomber Offensive (CBO). It ranks, I
think, with AWPD-1 and AWPD-42 as one of the finest air
documents of the entire war. While Eaker’s hand was discernible in its
formulation, the document itself appears to have been fathered by a
greatly gifted British airman, Air Vice Marshal Sir John Slessor,
Assistant Chief of Air Staff for Policy. Eaker and Jack Slessor were
close friends, and they shared a common view of air power. It was
Slessor who had provided for “a sustained air offensive against
Germany” as a key element in the joint strategy of the American-
British Conference (ABC-1) agreed upon in February of 1941. Eaker
had kept Slessor abreast of American strategic thinking. Slessor was
thoroughly familiar with AWPD-1 and AWPD-42 and the objectives
expressed in both American plans. He was thoroughly familiar with
the target systems of each, the tactics proposed, and results expected.
Eaker and Slessor were eye to eye in terms of airpower’s contribution
to victory and the place of strategic air power in grand strategy.
Slessor said American plans and objectives had great merit, though
they may have been somewhat optimistic in some respects.

Slessor’s document, “The Casablanca Directive,” specified vigor-
ous prosecution by both British and American air forces toward a
common grand strategic objective, optimizing the special strength and
capabilities of each air force toward that common goal. As described
in the directive, the ultimate objective of British and American
strategic air forces was: “The progressive destruction and dislocation
of the German military, industrial and economic system, and the
undermining of the morale of the German people to a point where
their capacity for armed resistance is fatally weakened.” Pending
preparation and approval of a plan for the Combined Bomber
Offensive, the Casablanca Directive called for destruction or neutral-
ization of:

a. German submarine construction yards.
b. The German aircraft industry.

72

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 94 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

c. German transportation.
d. German oil plants.
e. Other targets of war industry.

These targets were taken directly out of AWPD-1 and AWPD-42,
with one important omission: German electric power. That target,
however, could be included in “other targets of war industry.”

The directive endorsed both American and British grand strategy
for air power, and recognized both RAF doctrine and experience and
American tactical doctrine. The Eighth Air Force and RAF Bomber
Command could operate as coordinate members of a team progressing
toward a common destination, without being literally tied together.
RAF Bomber Command was free to continue its chosen air strategy
using the bombers designed for that method; the Eighth Air Force was
free to pursue its doctrine of destruction of selective targets by daylight
bombing, using day bombers and fighters. Together they would
contribute toward an agreed grand objective, the “fatal weakening” of
Nazi Germany. The Combined Chiefs and the President and the
Prime Minister approved the directive. At one stroke air grand
strategy had been accepted and approved. Air power would take its
place with land power and sea power.

No agreement was reached concerning an invasion of northern
France, which the British opposed; but neither was there agreement
against it; and the Casablanca Directive made no mention of it. The
objective of the air forces was not directed to attainment of air
superiority over European beaches and support of an invasion. It
focused upon dislocation and disruption of the German state, and its
capability and willingness to continue the war. If the German state
was “fatally weakened,” it was going to fall. It might or might not take
a push in the form of an invasion to cause it to topple, provided the
strategic air forces were built up on schedule and were fully employed
without dilution or diversion from the intermediate objective and the
primary targets for six months at full strength. Final decision on
invasion of northern France was postponed. In the meantime, tactical
air forces would be built up to support such an invasion. Eaker’s cup
was surely running over.

73

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 95 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

From Policy to Operational Plans

At General Arnold’s suggestion, and with Air Chief Marshal
Portal’s endorsement, a joint U.S. Army Air Forces-RAF team was
set up in Eaker’s headquarters in 1943 to prepare a plan for carrying
out the Casablanca Directive. The team consisted of members of
Eaker’s staff, the two B-17 wing commanders of the Eighth Air Force
(Brig. Gen. Frederick L. Anderson and myself), representatives of the
Air Ministry and RAF Bomber Command, and a representative from
the British Ministry of Economic Warfare. I was chairman of the
planning team. .

Col. Charles P. Cabell, who had been one of Arnold’s special
advisors, arrived at General Eaker’s headquarters on March 23, 1943,
carrying the list of potential target systems prepared by the Committee
of Operations Analysts. General Eaker then turned to the planning
team to prepare the strategic plan of operations and select the target
systems which would come within the capability of Eighth Air Force
while contributing most to the accomplishment of the objective, after
considering the scheduled growth of the force and the potential
combat losses. The operational plan would also set up a proposed time
schedule.

To direct this planning team, I had been called in from my 1st
Bombardment Wing Headquarters. General Frederick Anderson was
brought in from the 4th Bombardment Wing and, at General Eaker’s
request, Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Portal furnished the very able
Air Commodore Sidney O. Bufton, RAF, Director of Bomber
Operations at the Air Ministry. Sidney Bufton was a most valuable
addition to the planning team. He had been, and continued to be, an
important contributor to the bomber offensive. Gp. Capt. Arthur
Morley, RAF, was also a member, as were Maj. Richard Hughes (one
of the original members of the Strategic Air Intelligence Section), Lt.
Col. John S. Hardy, and Lt. Col. Arthur C. “Sailor” Agan, Jr., all
from General Eaker’s staff. Colonel Cabell also participated. Even
though the team set up by General Eaker bore no official designation,
it might be called the CBO Planning Team, seeing that it produced the

714

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 96 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

plan for the Combined Bomber Offensive from the United Kingdom
and the Mediterranean.

The plan would differ from AWPD-1 and AWPD-42 in one
important respect. The former were “Requirement Plans,” designed to
prescribe what should be accomplished and what was needed. The
plan for the CBO was a “Capability Plan.” Its purpose was to
prescribe what should be done to achieve an objective with forces
already committed to production.

The salient features of the plan were as follows:

I. | Objective: The Casablanca Directive.

II. Primary Target Systems: The report of the Committee of
Operations Analysts has concluded that the destruction and continued
neutralization of some sixty targets, among nineteen target systems, listed in
priority, will gravely impair and might paralyze the western Axis war effort.
The priority list of the nineteen target systems is: German aircraft industry,
with first priority on fighter aircraft, including assembly plants and engine
factories; ball bearings; petroleum; grinding wheels; nonferrous metals;
synthetic rubber and tires; submarine construction yards and bases; military
motor transport; general transportation systems; coking plants; steel; ma-
chine tools; electric power; electric equipment; optical precision instruments;
chemicals; food production; nitrogen and the chemical industry; antitank
machinery and antiaircraft machinery. There are several combinations among
the industries studied that might achieve this result. From the systems
suggested by the Committee of Operations Analysts, six systems comprising
seventy-six precision targets have been selected: German aircraft industry;
submarine construction yards and bases; ball bearings; oil; synthetic rubber
and tires; military transport vehicles.

III. Intermediate Objective—German Air Force: The German fight-
er strength in Western Europe is being augmented. If the growth of the
German fighter strength is not arrested quickly, it could become literally
impossible to carry out the destruction planned for the strategic air offensive,
and thus to create the conditions necessary for ultimate decisive action by our
combined forces on the continent. Hence, the successful prosecution of the air
offensive against the principal objective is dependent upon a prior (or
simultaneous) offensive against the German fighter strength.

IV. Integrated RAF-United States Army Air Force Offensive: The
combined efforts of the entire United States and British bomber forces could

75

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 97 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

produce the results required to achieve the mission prescribed for this theater.
Fortunately, the capabilities of the two forces are entirely complementary.

The tremendous and ever-increasing striking power of the RAF bombing
is designed to so destroy German material living conditions and economic
facilities as to undermine the willingness and ability of the German worker to
continue the war.

It is considered that the most effective results from strategic bombing
will be obtained by directing the combined day-and-night effort of the United
States and British bomber forces to all-out attacks against targets which are
mutually complementary in undermining a limited number of selected
objective systems.

Vv. General Plan of Operations: The plan of operations is divided
into four phases. The depth of penetration, the number of targets available,
and the capacity of the bombing forces increases successively with each
phase.

VI. ‘Forces Required:*

First Phase—800 U.S. heavy bombers on hand by July. Depth of
penetration—generally limited to range of escort fighters. (There is one
notable exception—the ball-bearing factory at Schweinfurt.)

Second Phase—1,192 U.S. heavy bombers on hand by October. Depth of
penetration—400 miles from bases in England.

Third Phase—1,746 U.S. heavy bombers on hand by January 1944.
Depth of penetration—500 miles.

Fourth Phase—2,702 U.S. heavy bombers on hand by June 1944. Depth
of penetration limited only by operating radius of action of bomber aircraft.

If the forces required as set forth above are made available on the dates
indicated, it will be possible to carry out the mission prescribed in the
Casablanca Conference. If those forces are not made available, then that
mission is not attainable in mid—1944.

In view of the ability of adequate and properly used air power to impair
the industrial source of the enemy’s military strength, only the most vital
considerations should be permitted to delay or divert the application of an
adequate air striking force to this task.

Upon completion, the CBO plan was presented to General Eaker
and, after considerable discussion, he approved it. It was later given to

the new European Theater Commander, Lt. Gen. Frank M. Andrews,
and he also concurred. Meanwhile, the RAF members of the

*Actually, this was a reflection of the total number of aircraft scheduled for delivery.

76

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 98 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

committee made similar presentations to Air Chief Marshal Sir
Charles F. A. Portal, Chief of the Air Staff of the Royal Air Force.
General Eaker took the plan to Washington and personally turned
it over to the Joint Chiefs of Staff on April 20, 1943. In a masterful
briefing made without reference to written matter, he won their
approval and personal commendation for his performance.

Change in the Casablanca Directive

After the plan for the Combined Bomber Offensive was referred to
General Andrews, and apparently after General Eaker left for
Washington, a sentence was added to the Casablanca Directive. The
source of the change is not clear, but it seems likely to have been added
by Air Chief Marshal Portal. This new sentence read: “This is
constructed as meaning so weakened as to permit combined operations
on the Continent.” The original Casablanca Directive, approved by
the Combined Chiefs of Staff, President Roosevelt, and Prime Minister
Churchill, did not include this sentence. It is hard to believe that the
approved directive could have been altered without their knowledge.
But there is no proof that their concurrence was either sought or
received.

Unaware of the change, the planning team that developed the
CBO plan used the original Casablanca Directive as the air objective.
Quoting from the plan circulated to the Combined Chiefs of Staff on
May 15, 1943:

1. Problem: To provide a plan to accomplish, by a combined
US.-British air offensive, the “progressive destruction and disloca-
tion of the German Military, industrial, and economic system, and
the undermining of the morale of the German people to a point
where their capacity for armed resistance is fatally weakened;” as
directed by the Combined Chiefs of Staff at Casablanca.

No reference is made to any amendment or appendix to the directive.
However, the plan transmitted on April 15, 1943, by Air Chief
Marshal Portal to General Arnold, Commanding General, AAF, has
this quotation:

77

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 99 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

1. The Mission: The mission of the U.S. and British bomber
forces, as prescribed by the Combined Chiefs of Staff at Casablanca,
is as follows:

To conduct a joint U.S.-British air offensive to accomplish the
progressive destruction and dislocation of the German military,
industrial, and economic system and the undermining of the morale
of the German people to a point where their capacity for armed
resistance is fatally weakened. This is constructed as meaning so
weakened as to permit initiation of final combined operations on the
Continent [emphasis added].

Air Chief Marshal Portal may have added the sentence after
discussions with his associates on the Chiefs of Staff Committee. The
addition may have been meant to win support for the strategic air
offensive from the Army and Navy members, whose principal interest
was in surface warfare. Or it may have reflected General Arnold’s
known concern for support of a cross-channel strategy, which General
Marshall strongly endorsed. The invasion, tentatively scheduled for
mid-summer 1944, was on the agenda for the upcoming Trident
meeting in Washington.

Whatever the cause, the added sentence cast doubt upon the real
intention of the Casablanca Directive. If the sentence had said: “This
is constructed as including so weakened as to permit initiation of final
combined operations on the Continent,” it would have been more
palatable to the airmen. As it was, three basic interpretations of the
Casablanca Directive were now in evidence.

For instance, RAF Bomber Command considered the ‘‘undermin-
ing of the morale of the German people” as the significant clause
leading to the “point where their capacity for armed resistance is
fatally weakened.” This did not necessarily entail killing large
numbers of people. It did entail depriving them of homes, heat, light,
water, urban transportation, and perhaps food. Homeless, hungry
workers and civilian employees, they reasoned, do not produce
munitions and, like soldiers who are wounded, are a greater impedi-
ment to the state at war than dead ones. Also, factories deprived of
workers and utilities as a byproduct of urban bombing are useless as
sources of combat munitions. Finally, there was the added hope that

78

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 100 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

civilians might become so discouraged as to lose their willingness to
support the war.

In contrast, the U.S. Strategic Air Forces looked upon “the
progressive destruction and dislocation of the German military,
industrial, and economic system” as the path to the “fatal weakening,”
and believed it could best be done by destroying selected targets in
Germany. “Fatal weakening” meant the impending collapse of the
entire German state, not simply a breach in the coastal defenses of
France. A structure that has been “fatally weakened” is doomed to
collapse.

The differences between British and American airmen were not so
deep as might appear on the surface. The responsible air commanders
generally agreed on the suitability of the strategic objective to be
attained. The debate was over method and was related more to
operational equipment and capability and survivability than to the
need for “fatal weakening” per se. It will be recalled that at first the
RAF was committed to the doctrine of daylight, precision attacks, but
the bombers available to carry out the mission could not withstand the
Luftwaffe’s determined attacks. Hence the heavy British Stirlings and
Lancasters, which sacrificed armament for bomb-carrying capacity,
switched to night area type bombing. Indeed, the British were so sure
bombers could not survive German fighter attacks by day that they
repeatedly tried to convince the Americans that the basic doctrine of
high altitude, precision bombing in daylight would fail.

On their part, the American planners felt they had fully measured
the compelling desirability of precision bombing against the dangers
inherent in daylight attack. As indicated earlier, they believed survival
was possible through heavy defensive firepower and proper concentra-
tion of bomber formation flying. They knew it was risky, but
destruction of selected vital targets through precision bombing was so
important that the risk, as well as the reduced bombload caused by
heavy armament, was regarded as acceptable. Effectiveness of the
bomber offensive should be measured against the impact upon the
German national war machine, not simply in terms of bomber losses.

Top-level soldiers and sailors of both nations—and to a large
degree the President and Prime Minister as well—considered the chief

79

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 101 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

purpose of the Combined Bomber Offensive to be something quite
different from that envisioned by the airmen. To them the real goal of
the bombing offensive was making possible an invasion of the
Continent. In their view, the “fatal weakening” meant the destruction
and dislocation of the German military system which would ordinarily
oppose the invasion. ‘“‘This is construed as meaning so weakened as to
permit initiation of final combined operations on the Continent.”

From the standpoint of the airmen, the added sentence to the
Casablanca Directive would have been more acceptable had it read:
“This is construed as including so weakened as to permit initiation of
final combined operations on the Continent.” They believed the
primary objective was “the progressive destruction and dislocation of
the German military, industrial, and economic system, and the
undermining of the morale of the German people to the point where
their capacity for armed resistance is fatally weakened.” That purpose
encompassed destruction of targets in Germany, not softening up
beach defenses and restricting military movements in France.

After the Joint Chiefs of Staff accepted General Eaker’s plan and
the Combined Chiefs of Staff approved it at the Trident Conference on
May 18, 1943, Sir Charles Portal, acting as executive agent for the
Combined Chiefs, issued a directive to proceed with the Combined
Bomber Offensive. The Eighth Air Force by day and the RAF Bomber
Command by night were thus launched upon their parallel and
coordinate efforts, to cause the fatal weakening of the willingness and
capability of the German people to pursue the war. The Combined
Bomber Offensive (code name Pointblank) was under way.

The two strands of strategic thought—decisive weakening of
interior Germany by air power, and air preparation for decisive air-
ground operations on the Continent—clashed with each other due to
the restriction in timing. Originally, the plans had specified six months
of air offensive before direct preparation for invasion. However, the
campaign in North Africa and the Mediterranean (opposed by the
Joint Chiefs on military grounds) delayed by about four months the
crucial assault on the German air forces from bases in England. This
telescoped by a like time interval the period between the completion of
the offensive against the intermediate objective (defeat of the German

80

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 102 ---
PLANNING THE WAR FOR EUROPE

Air Force) and the readiness of the ground forces for invasion. The
four months of air attack of the primary objectives (the industrial and
economic targets in Germany) were postponed until after the invasion.

The dichotomy in strategic concepts for the prosecution of
Pointblank came to a head about ten months after Trident, when
General Eisenhower as Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary
Forces, demanded concentration of the strategic air forces upon
targets in France to prepare for the invasion. This was right after the
crippling of the German air forces in the last week of February 1944,
but before the main assault upon the targets in interior Germany could
be carried out in force.

The Casablanca Conference had brought another blessing to
General Eaker and the Eighth Air Force. General Marshall selected
Lt. Gen. Frank M. Andrews, former Commanding General of the
GHQ Air Force and an Air Corps officer, as European Theater
Commander, replacing General Eisenhower who had moved to North
Africa.

Andrews was the number one airpower leader and advocate of his
day. Perhaps the most skillful pilot in the Air Corps, he was also the
leading senior air strategist as well. His experience was broad. He had
been the first GHQ Air Force Commander in 1935 and had organized
and trained that pioneering element of American air power. In 1939 he
had been selected by General Marshall to be G-3 of the War
Department General Staff, the first airman to head a major WDGS
division. Eaker hailed his arrival in England with joy. But joy turned
to tragedy when Andrews was killed as his bomber crashed against a
mountain in Iceland where he was making an inspection of American
forces. At the same time, Eaker was flying back to London from
Washington.

Andrew’s replacement as European Theater Commander was Lt.
Gen. Jacob L. Devers, an Army ground officer. It is doubtful if any
other officer in any guise, with or without pilot’s wings, could have
equaled Devers’ contribution to the Eighth Air Force. He quickly
absorbed and embraced Eaker’s strategic airpower concepts and
backed them to the limit of his authority. Eaker and Devers became a
unified command team whose binding elements were dedication to

81

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 103 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

strategic purpose and friendship born of mutual admiration and
respect.

82

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 104 ---
Chapter III

Execution and Evaluation

During the early period, when bomber units of the Eighth were
finding themselves and tempering their quality in the heat of combat,
success or failure hung upon the human factor that had to sustain the
greatest strain of all—the morale of the combat crews. The cutoff in
the promised flow of additional units in the buildup of the bomber
force and the absence of replacements for groups already at war,
caused by the diversion of heavy bombers to the Mediterranean
Theater, placed an almost intolerable strain on the morale of the
crews. The morning after each mission saw the number at the
breakfast table dwindle. By March 1943 the crews of the initial groups
were at less than half strength. Each mission was costing between five
and six percent in combat casualties, and missions were running at the
rate of five per month. Because the force was so small, each mission
was a “maximum effort.”

At coffee tables and in mess halls and reading rooms, the crews
developed a new and morbid game. Graphs were plotted, replotted,
discussed, and examined. The graphs were of two kinds. The less
sophisticated type of curve was plotted with the ordinate as percentage
of strength remaining, and the abscissa as an expression of time in
months. When the straight line crossed the abscissa, in about three
months, everyone would be gone. It did little good for the mathemati-
cians among the crews to spot the fallacy in this simple forecast and to

83

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 105 ---
BOMB LOADING AT AN 8TH AIR FORCE BASE IN
ENGLAND—1943. (Courtesy USAF Art Collection)

84

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 106 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

show the line was really a curve, and there would actually be twenty
percent left after three more months, instead of none. Like most
mathematical approaches, this icy logic was of more interest to
academicians than to aircraft combat crews, and at best it was of little
comfort. The “combat tour’ of twenty-five missions was held out as
an element of hope, but the chances of completing a combat tour if the
combat units still did not get replacements were about one in five
(about twenty percent), and this was not encouraging.

The importance of promptly replacing combat losses is clearly
illustrated in these survival expectations. If replacements had been
promptly made, the chance of survival of each crew would have been
forty-four percent at the end of four months instead of twenty-seven,
and the chances of surviving a full twenty-five missions would have
been nearly two in five. Fortunately, the forces did begin to increase
and the replacements to flow about the middle of the year.

Schweinfurt-Regensberg Raids

Toward the end of June 1943, Brig. Gen. Frederick L. Anderson,
who had been a member of the planning team for the Combined
Bomber Offensive, moved up from 4th Bombardment Wing
Commander to command the VIII Bomber Command. He and Eaker
at once went to work preparing for the first assault upon the ball-
bearing factories at Schweinfurt and the Me-109 assembly plant at
Regensburg. The plan for the Combined Bomber Offensive had called
for the deep penetration of Germany to reach Schweinfurt as soon as it
would be possible to launch a force of 300 bombers. The ball-bearing
factories were so vital to Germany’s prosecution of the war and so
concentrated as a target that it was resolved to attack them as early as
possible, even before long-range fighters were available, lest the
Germans sense their vulnerability and disperse the factories. The story
of the two missions against Schweinfurt has been ably told. One of the
best descriptions is that by Thomas M. Coffey in Decision Over
Schweinfurt. The mission was daring and innovative. The objective
was sound, as attested by Albert Speer, German Minister of Muni-
tions, who said: “In those days, we anxiously asked ourselves how

85

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 107 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

soon the enemy would realize that he could paralyze the production of
thousands of armaments plants merely by destroying five or six
relatively small (ball-bearing factories) targets.” He was asked after
the war what would have happened if there had been concerted and
continuous attacks on the ball-bearing industry. He replied: “Arma-
ments production would have been critically weakened after two
months and after four months would have been brought completely to
a standstill.”

This strategic objective was obviously well chosen. The stakes
were very high and the cost was heavy. Weather destroyed the
coordination of the attacks, and German fighters took their toll. Two
targets in close proximity were chosen: the 1st Bombardment Wing
attacked the ball-bearing factories at Schweinfurt; the 3d Wing
attacked the Me—109 factory at Regensburg and then flew on to bases
in North Africa. Of the 230 bombers of the 1st Bombardment Wing
that took off for Schweinfurt on August 17, 1943, led by Brig. Gen.
Robert B. Williams, 34 did not return—a loss rate of 15 percent. The
3d Wing, led by Col. Curtis E. LeMay, suffered even more. Of the 146
bombers that had taken off for Regensburg, only 122 reached the
landing bases in North Africa, a loss rate of 16% percent. The
bombing had been good but the bombs used against Schweinfurt had
not been heavy enough. Though the buildings were destroyed, the
heavy machinery survived. Restoration of these factories became the
No. 1 priority of Albert Speer’s ministry. In the next 2 months, just as
the available supply of bearings was approaching exhaustion, the
factories commenced to recover production. The attacks on Schwein-
furt were repeated on October 14, with 291 Flying Fortresses
dispatched on the mission. Sixty did not return, a loss rate of 20%
percent. While the bombing was good and the destruction extensive,
no air force could continue attacks with such loss ratios. The ball-
bearing factories were again rebuilt, but it was a close call for the
Germans. To keep producing, single factories were sending individual
motorcycle messengers to Schweinfurt to bring back dispatch cases of
bearings.

These events are well known. Who can speculate on the anxiety
and anguish of Eaker and Anderson which were pitted against their

86

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 108 ---
KUGELFISCHER WERKE
FICHTSL AND SACHS A,G.
V.K.F. WERKE II

DEUTSCHE STAR KUGELHALTER
V.K.F, WERKE I

LANGE FACTORY BUILDING
ULTRA MARINE FACTORY

MALT FACTORY

DS Sie
.

WM wot
ey

os

Oo

SA.628
SCHVWEINFURT BALL BARING INDUSTRY
14.10.43.

APPROXIMATE BO'R PLOT

* Position of ‘well defined bursts
Areas of heavy concentration
+ Approximate locati
J Target areas
Areas in which incendiar: 1

n of fire
r

BOMBING RESULTS of the Third Bombardment Division’s
mission over Schweinfurt, Germany, October 14, 1943.

87

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 109 ---
BRIG. GEN. HANSELL, Commanding General, 1st Bomb
Wing, (left) greets Col. Curtis E. LeMay, Commander of the
Wing’s 305th Bomb Group, beside a Boeing B-17. —

A SEVERED JU-88 AT BRUNSWICK, GERMANY, testifies
to the AAF’s determination to break the back of the German Air
Force.

88

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 110 ---
EIGHTH AIR FORCE BOMBERS strike a ball-bearing factory
at Stuttgart.

THREE AMERICAN OBSERVERS examine the twisted ruins
of the Kugelfischer ball-bearing works at Schweinfurt, bombed
repeatedly by Allied forces.

89

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 111 ---
B-17 FLYING FORTRESSES OVER SCHWEINFURT.

AT THE WAR’S
END, SCHWEIN-
FURT LAY RAV-
AGED BY CON-
TINUOUS AIR
ATTACKS.

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 112 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

determination to perform these vital missions? If the first mission
called for courage, the second added iron will. Only the prospect of
assuring victory, shortening the war, and saving thousands—perhaps
hundreds of thousands—of lives bolstered the will of the commanders,
at a cost which would have overwhelmed men of lesser caliber than
Eaker and Anderson.

The Schweinfurt missions had indeed been costly, too costly to
pursue at that rate of combat losses. The escort fighters, whose
assistance had been predicted, were sorely needed. Penetration of
German air space had to be limited until long-range fighters could be
provided. The solution came in the form of droppable auxiliary tanks.
Why no one had thought of this earlier defies explanation. The
Germans had used this device to extend the range of the Me—109 in
the Spanish civil war. But the technical solution was not as simple as
would first appear. The tanks had to be pressurized to force the
gasoline up to the engine carburetor. And the logistic problem of
providing tanks in adequate quantity at the last minute was formidable
also. A thousand fighters using two tanks each and operating five
missions a month would expend ten thousand tanks monthly. It really
was not possible to provide such quantities from English resources,
and that many tanks took up a lot of transatlantic shipping space. But
by the end of September 1943, P-47 fighters with drop tanks escorted
bombers all the way from bases in Britain to a target in Germany—
Emden. By October they were reaching Munster. By November the
record of the Thunderbolts stood at 273 for a loss of 73. The toll of
American bombers lost dropped correspondingly. The range of escort
improved with the arrival of P-51s in October, and by March 1944 it
extended to a radius of 850 miles from base. The bomber offensive was
revitalized.

Reorganizing U.S. Strategic Air Force for the Combined Bomber
Offensive

General Arnold, in a discussion with Air Chief Marshal Portal

during the Quadrant Conference at Quebec in August 1943, ques-
tioned the feasibility of getting maximum operational use out of

91

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 113 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

bombers stationed in England, in view of the winter weather. Air
Marshal Portal agreed and pointed out the desirability of operating
from Italy, especially in view of the proximity of two great German
fighter factories near Vienna. Together these plants were estimated to
be assembling about sixty percent of German fighter production and
could be reached from Italian bases. Portal expressed again his deep
concern over the mounting strength of the German fighter force. This
decision to base major strategic air forces in Italy was made after the
decision to invade Italy, and was not one of the reasons for making the
invasion.

On October 9, 1943, General Arnold submitted to the Joint Chiefs
of Staff a plan for splitting U.S. air power in the Mediterranean by
creating two air forces. One, the Fifteenth, would be a strategic air
force, to be employed in the Combined Bomber Offensive. The other,
the Twelfth, would be a tactical air force and would keep on
supporting surface operations in the Mediterranean. The six groups of
heavy bombers currently assigned to the Twelfth would be transferred
to the Fifteenth, and would be augmented by fifteen additional groups
diverted from the buildup of the Eighth.

The Combined Chiefs of Staff approved this plan on October 22,
after consultation with General Eisenhower. General Spaatz was
named Commander of the U.S. Army Air Forces in the Mediterranean
Theater, and Maj. Gen. James H. Doolittle was named Commander of
the Fifteenth Air Force. General Doolittle continued to serve as
Commander in Chief of the Northwest African Strategic Air Force.
Initially, the Fifteenth included two groups of B-25 and three of B-26
medium bombers.

Headquartered at Foggia in Italy, the Fifteenth was programmed
to consist of twenty-one heavy bombardment groups, seven fighter
groups, and one reconnaissance group by March 31, 1944. It was to
remain under the control of the Mediterranean commander but would
operate in furtherance of the Combined Bomber Offensive. It would be
available on an emergency basis to support the surface forces in the
Mediterranean.

This arrangement left much to be desired as to coordinating the
participation of the Fifteenth Air Force in the Combined Bomber

92

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 114 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

Offensive. The problem was resolved at the Sextant Conference in
Cairo in December 1943. After some debate, coupled with polite
dissent on the part of the British, General Arnold succeeded in
creating the Europe-wide U.S. strategic air command for which he had
striven so long. The Fifteenth and Eighth Air Forces were linked in
the U.S. Strategic Air Forces in Europe under the command of
General Spaatz. At the same time, General Eisenhower was chosen to
command the Allied Expeditionary Forces for the invasion of France.
He elected to take with him General Doolittle, whom he had come to
trust and admire, to command the Eighth Air Force, which would
support the invasion. Also, Mediterranean Allied Air Forces was
formed, under the command of Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker.

General Spaatz set up Headquarters of the U.S. Strategic Air
Forces on January 1, 1944, in London, exercising command jurisdic-
tion over the Eighth and Fifteenth Air Forces. General Eaker assumed
command of the Mediterranean Allied Air Forces, headquartered in
Italy. Maj. Gen. Nathan F. Twining relieved General Doolittle as
Fifteenth Air Force Commander. Maj. Gen. Frederick L. Anderson
moved from Commanding General, VIII Bomber Command, to
become Deputy Commander for Operations for General Spaatz; Maj.
Gen. Hugh J. Knerr became Deputy Commander for Administration.
General Eisenhower established Supreme Headquarters Allied Expe-
ditionary Forces (SHAEF) in London.

The commander of the Allied tactical air forces for the invasion
had already been designated at the Quadrant Conference in Quebec.
He was Air Chief Marshal Sir Trafford L. Leigh-Mallory, who had
commanded No. 12 Group of RAF Fighter Command in the Battle of
Britain, and had succeeded Air Vice Marshal Keith R. Park as
Commander of No. 11 Group after the battle. He had eventually
become Air Officer Commanding in Chief, RAF Fighter Command.
His previous experience had been related to Army cooperation. He
was unfamiliar with broad strategic air warfare, and he had never had
the benefit of service at high levels of the Air Ministry or on matters
involving the various committees serving the British Chiefs of Staff
Committee.

93

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 115 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

The Air Offensive against the German Air Force

With the arrival of General Spaatz, intensive preparations were
undertaken for an all-out offensive against the German Air Force,
including the aircraft and engine factories, in furtherance of Point-
blank. Though weather continued to frustrate intentions, there were
three successful radar bombing attacks against the I. G. Farbenindus-
trie chemical works at Ludwigshafen, which presented a good
radarscope return. There was one fleeting opportunity for visual
bombing on the German aircraft and engine factories, and the Eighth
seized upon it.

On January 11, the forecast indicated a brief break in the clouds
over central Germany. The Eighth sent a major force against high-
priority targets of the German aircraft industry. Three divisions,
comprising 663 B-17s and B—24s, were dispatched to the following
targets: FW-190 fighter production at Oschersleben; JU-88 (multi-
purpose aircraft) production at Halberstadt; and Me-109 fighter parts
and assembly plants at Brunswick. The weather, bad at the bases, did
not clear as expected en route, and two of the air divisions were given
recall orders. Fighter escort was furnished but it was difficult to carry
out. In the Eighth Air Force, there was just one group of P-51s that
could cover at the target. Only the 1st Bombardment Division and one
combat wing of the 3rd Bombardment Division went on to the targets.
One hundred thirty-nine bombers attacked Oschersleben, 52 bombers
attacked Halberstadt, and 47 bombers attacked the Brunswick targets.

The P—51 group put up a magnificent fight but was badly
outnumbered by defending German fighters. The lst Bombardment
Division lost 34 bombers. Total losses were 60 bombers, no fighters.
But the bombing had been good, considering the heavy fighting, and
the results were creditable. The formations attacking Oschersleben put
51 percent of their bombs within 1,000 feet of the aiming point for an
average radial error of about 1,000 feet and a circular error probable
(CEP) of about 930 feet. The two groups bombing Brunswick did
much better, placing 73 and 74 percent of their bombs within 1,000
feet of the aiming point, for an average CEP of 750 feet. Photo
reconnaissance showed very extensive damage.

94

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 116 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

By a strange quirk of irony the Fifteenth Air Force was even more
hampered by winter weather than the Eighth. It had been confidently
expected that weather would be more favorable for the bomber
offensive from Mediterranean bases than from English ones. In the
winter of 1943-1944 the reverse was true. The Fifteenth did get off to
an auspicious start. On November 2, the second day after its creation,
the Fifteenth launched a successful attack against the very important
Messerschmitt plants at Wiener Neustadt, near Vienna, that were
turning out many Me~109 fighters. Production dropped from 218 in
October to 80 in November and to 30 in December. Foul weather
prevented any followup.

The opportunity to deal a crushing blow to the German Air Force
required about a week of visual bombing weather. General Spaatz was
especially anxious to find three days of clear weather over central
Germany. But bad weather persisted, and the plan prepared for
execution in January continued to be postponed. This produced an
interesting aberration in logic.

The diversion of heavy bombers by the Joint Chiefs of Staff away
from the Eighth Air Force had left the Eighth far short of its
requirements in the CBO. The force was not large enough to strike
telling blows during the periods of good weather. But those same
Chiefs of Staff who had weakened the Eighth expressed dissatisfaction
with its performance in the fall of 1943 on the ground that it had not
achieved its “overriding intermediate objective‘-—the defeat of the
German Air Force.

With the passage of time, the cross-channel invasion (Overlord)
loomed closer and closer on the horizon. Overlord simply could not be
undertaken if the German Air Force continued to be a strong and
vigorous menace. American ground planners in particular grew
increasingly insistent that the German Air Force be removed as a
significant threat. Many wanted to drop all the primary target systems
of Pointblank and leave only one—the intermediate objective. This
would then call for the defeat of the German Air Force, not simply as
a matter of overriding priority, but of sole priority.

95

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 117 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Change in Pointblank Directive by the Combined Chiefs of Staff
(February 1944)

There were more and more insistent demands for a change in the
Pointblank directive. Eaker and Spaatz opposed this change, asserting
that the German Air Force was already in top priority, but that the
war would not end with a successful lodgment in Normandy. The
contribution of the Combined Bomber Offensive went far beyond the
defeat of the German fighter force; it included the disruption of the
whole supporting structure of the German state.

The problem was temporarily resolved on February 13, 1944,
when the Combined Chiefs of Staff issued a new directive for the
Combined Bomber Offensive. The new objective was stated as:

The progressive destruction and dislocation of the German military,
industrial, and economic systems, the disruption of vital elements of
lines of communication and the material reduction of German air
combat strength, by the successful prosecution of the combined
bomber offensive from all convenient bases.

The priorities of primary target systems were revised. First
priority was German single-engine and twin-engine airframe and
component production, and Axis-controlled ball-bearing production.
Second priority was installations supporting the German Air Force.
Other target systems in their order of priority were:

a. Crossbow targets (V-1 German missile installations).

b. Berlin and other industrial areas, to be attacked by RAF
Bomber Command and US. Strategic Air Forces in Europe (by
radar), whenever weather or tactical conditions proved suitable for
such activities but not for operations against the primary objectives.

c. Targets in southeast Europe (cities, transportation, and other
suitable objectives in the Balkans and in satellite countries). These
would be attacked by the Mediterranean Allied Air Forces supported
by the Fifteenth Air Force, whenever weather or tactical conditions
prevented operations against Pointblank objectives or in support of
important land operations in Italy.

The guidance stipulated for the conduct of combined operations
was: “Mutually supporting attacks by the Strategic Air Forces of both

96

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 118 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

nations pursued with relentless determination against the same target
areas or systems, so far as tactical conditions allow.”

In this restatement of the objectives of the Combined Bomber
Offensive, reference was made again to destruction and dislocation of
the German military, industrial, and economic system. But the
original primary targets were not listed. Undermining of morale and
the fatal weakening of German willingness and ability to fight had
been dropped. Defeat of the German Air Force had been emphasized.
Although reference to specified industrial target systems as primary
targets had been deleted, those primary targets had not been
specifically canceled. An invitation had been offered to use Pointblank
forces for attacks against cities and transportation and other suitable
targets in the Balkans, or for the support of ground operations in the
Mediterranean Theater. A new element of significance had been
added: “disruption of vital lines of communication.” Vital to what?
The German industrial and economic system? Or to the movement of
German forces and supplies? Was this concept introduced at the
request of General Eisenhower who embraced the transportation plan
with such single-minded determination?

What had happened to oil, synthetic rubber and tires, and motor
transport vehicles? Presumably the submarine yards and bases had
intentionally been dropped. The submarine building yards were no
longer a principal concern. The submarines had been defeated or their
menace reduced. Their omission was not surprising. The position may
well be taken that the reference to “other targets” should be construed
as new or additional targets and not an indication that the previously
prescribed primary targets were not still in high priority. It seems
inconceivable anyone would have suggested deletion of oil and rubber.

Actually, this was apparently the interpretation placed on the new
directives by the operating heads, Spaatz and Harris. Both U.S.
Strategic Air Forces and Bomber Command kept oil in high priority.
Transportation (communications) appeared with increasing frequency
in the operations that followed. Neither Spaatz nor Eaker nor Harris
objected to putting German fighters at the top of the list. As a matter
of fact, they had been there all along. This change in directive almost
surely stemmed from the Joint Staff—coming up from the Joint War

97

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 119 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Plans Team for Europe through the Joint Plans Committee and the
Combined Plans Committee to the Joint and Combined Chiefs of
Staff. It was certainly a departure in tone from the concepts put
forward in the earlier plans stemming from the War Plans Division of
the Air Staff.

Big Week

In the last week of February 1944 the long-awaited opportunity to
strike a lethal blow at the German Air Force finally arrived. The
forecast pointed to a week of visual bombing weather over Germany.
On the 20th of February, the Fifteenth Air Force found itself
committed to local operations in support of the ground forces in the
Mediterranean, from which General Spaatz could not extricate it. So
the Eighth, assisted by fighters of the Ninth, launched the attack.

The mounting of this mission, ushering in Big Week and
culminating in a mortal blow to the German Air Force, involved one
of the crucial command decisions of the war. The plans had been
prepared and the orders issued earlier. Envisioned was an all-out
assault of 3 successive days on the German fighter factories. The
forces and their commanders anxiously awaited the predicted break in
the weather. February weather, often bad, was at its notorious worst in
1944. The night before the proposed assault found the skies solid and
the icing conditions severe. Throughout the night, weather aircraft
ascended and returned, bearing reports of the cloud and icing
conditions: ceiling 500 feet, tops of clouds 12,000 feet, heavy icing. It
would be necessary to start takeoffs before dawn because the hours of
daylight were so short at this time and latitude.

As the crucial hour approached, weather planes reported the tops
of clouds at 8,000 feet with heavy icing conditions on the way up. It
was still dark on the ground, with limited visibility. The heavily loaded
bombers would have to take off, go on instruments for the climb
through clouds with heavy icing conditions, and assemble into combat
boxes, combat wings, and air divisions in the dark. The fighters would
be especially taxed. They were heavily laden with fuel drop tanks, and
they were not as well instrumented as the bombers. Furthermore,

98

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 120 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

there was no assurance that the weather at the bases would clear for
landing. It is one thing to take off over a thousand heavy bombers and
nearly a thousand fighters on instruments. It is quite a different thing
to try to land them in instrument weather with no instrument landing
equipment. It was quite possible the entire Eighth Air Force and a
large part of the Ninth might be lost on a single mission. Maj. Gen.
Frederick L. Anderson, Deputy Commander for Operations for
General Spaatz and one of the finest bomber commanders of the war,
was deeply concerned but strongly favored the attack. For hours he
had been urging Spaatz to make a firm decision to go. Finally, when
the last moment for action had arrived, Spaatz told Anderson to issue
the order to go. The risks were so great and the conditions so
unfavorable that none of the subordinate commanders was willing to
take responsibility for the launch without a direct order from General
Spaatz personally. Spaatz quietly and firmly issued the order to go. It
was a momentous, dangerous, and highly successful command deci-
sion.* It was another crucial decision in the course of the war. The
back of the German fighter force was broken in bitter fighting in the
last week in February. The opportunity did not occur again in the next
two months. The weather did not make it possible. If General Spaatz
had not taken that bold command decision, the air forces could not
have guaranteed air superiority over the beaches of Normandy in June,
and almost certainly there would have been no invasion at that time.

In the best tradition of cooperation, RAF Bomber Command the
night before had struck Leipzig, in the area of the U.S. penetration. On
February 20, 16 combat wings of the 3 air divisions of the Eighth Air
force, numbering over 1,000 heavy bombers, took off in heavy
weather, supported by 17 groups of escort fighters from the Eighth
and Ninth Air Forces. In addition the RAF furnished 16 fighter
squadrons. Twelve German aircraft factories were the targets, 2 being

*From a conversation with General Cabell who had been at “Park House,” General
Spaatz’s headquarters on the outskirts of London at the time. Cabell, who had commanded a
combat wing of the Eighth Air Force, recalled that he was asked his opinion. He said in his
judgment the mission, though marginal, was feasible. General Spaatz turned to General
Anderson, who had been urging approval of the operation, and quietly made the decision to
“go.”

99

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 121 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

as far away as Posen in Poland. Bombing was good and losses were
slight. That night RAF Bomber Command struck with 600 bombers at
Stuttgart, a city vital to the aircraft industry. The Fifteenth was
grounded by weather on the 21st, but the Eighth again took off in
force. Broken cloud cover at the targets reduced the accuracy of
bombing.

On the 22d the Fifteenth participated by attacking the large
aircraft plant at Regensburg, and the Eighth put forth another
maximum effort. However, adverse weather again plagued the Eighth.
Two divisions, though airborne, had to abandon their primary targets,
and the other found its targets partially obscured. German fighter
opposition was vigorous on the 22d, and the Eighth lost 41 bombers
out of 430 sorties. The Fifteenth lost 14 bombers of the 183
dispatched. The escort fighters claimed 60 German fighters for a loss
of 11.

On the 23d the English weather was so poor that no missions were
scheduled by the Eighth. The Fifteenth, however, sent 102 bombers
against a ball-bearing plant in Austria. On the 24th the weather over
Germany opened up again and another maximum effort was launched.
This time the target list included Schweinfurt again, the target that
had cost 60 bombers out of 291 on October 14. The B-24s of the 2nd
Air Division of the Eighth lost heavily to German fighter attacks: 33
planes out of 239. The Schweinfurt force lost 11 of the 238 B-17s
dispatched. The Fifteenth attacked an aircraft component plant at
Steyr, Austria. The Fifteenth lost 17 bombers on this strike. The
intensity of the air battles is reflected in the claims. The bombers
claimed 108 German fighters destroyed, the escort fighters 37.

In an unprecedented string of luck, the weather was again
favorable on the 25th. Both the Fifteenth and Eighth attacked German
aircraft factories in southern Germany. The Fifteenth launched 400
bombers, of which 176 attacked the main target at Regensburg. The
rest, having insufficient range, were dispatched against other targets.
Bearing the brunt of the German fighter assaults, the Fifteenth lost 33
bombers on the Regensburg mission. The Eighth lost 31 out of 738.
All forces bombed their primary targets with generally good accuracy.

In this week of maximum effort to paralyze the German aircraft

100

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 122 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

industry and defeat the German Air Force before the fast-approaching
deadline for the Normandy invasion, the Eighth and Fifteenth Air
Forces launched 3,800 bomber sorties against Combined Bomber
Offensive targets (3,300 by the Eighth, 500 by the Fifteenth). Tonnage
of bombs dropped roughly equaled the total tonnage dropped by the
Eighth in the first year of its operations. The Eighth lost 137 heavy
bombers, the Fifteenth 89, an overall average of about 6 percent per
mission. Escort fighter sorties totaled 2,548 for the Eighth, 712 for the
Ninth, and 413 for the Fifteenth. Total escort fighter losses were 28.
Even with escorts, the bomber losses per sortie were nearly 5 times as
great as those of the escorting fighters. The RAF in this combined
effort made night attacks against 5 cities associated with the industries
and areas of the daylight effort, using 2,351 sorties, with a loss rate of
6.6 percent.

The U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey (USSBS) reported after the
war that those operations against the aircraft industrial system
damaged seventy-five percent of the buildings producing ninety
percent of German aircraft. While the German aircraft industry
showed an amazing ability to recuperate, and German aircraft were
soon coming off the production line, the effect upon German air power
was catastrophic. Whether from the bombing of aircraft industries or
from the vicious air battle, or both, the German Air Force never rose
again to its past performance.

The back of the German Air Force was broken in February 1944.
The Allied strategic air forces, assisted by fighters of the Ninth
(Tactical) Air Force, had defeated the German Air Force and attained
the neutralization of the Luftwaffe, the “intermediate” objective. They
were now ready to turn in force to the primary target systems. But it
was late in the day. The plans had called for six months of maximum-
scale operations with the forces at full maturity to produce the “fatal
weakening” preliminary to invasion. Only three months remained
before D-day, and much of the power of the air offensive would be
diverted from the primary objectives of the CBO and absorbed instead
in operations intended to soften up the German ground forces and
delay movements directly threatening the Normandy beaches. This
Giversion of strategic air forces to short-term, ground-operation goals

101

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 123 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

was insisted upon by General Eisenhower over the vigorous protest of
General Spaatz.

Big Week, for a variety of reasons, had achieved its basic purpose.
The resistance of Luftwaffe Fighter Command was broken, but it was
still capable of vicious spasms of fighting. Even so, the strategic air
forces with their heavy bombers and long-range escorts could choose
their targets almost anywhere in Germany and penetrate the defenses
to reach them without incurring intolerable losses.

Controversy over Employment of the U.S. Strategic Air Forces

It was the supreme irony that the U.S. Strategic Air Forces,
having won their crucial battle at such cost in blood and guts, having
attained the “overriding intermediate objective” that had stood in the
way of the primary strategic objectives, then faced an even more
formidable obstacle to the prosecution of the strategic air war. This
was the determination of high authorities and commanders to divert
the power of the strategic air forces away from those primary
objectives and apply it in a support role for the furtherance of the
ground forces objective. The conflict was not simply between air and
surface strategists. There were important air commanders who led the
fight to use the strategic air forces for ground support. But the
responsible strategic air commanders stood together in opposing such
diversion.

At the end of March, the U.S. Strategic Air Forces arrayed
against Axis Europe were:

groups
U.S. Eighth Air Force, heavy bombers 39
U.S. Fifteenth Air Force, heavy bombers 21

Total 60

(About 2,800 aircraft in operational units)

US. Eighth and Ninth Air Forces, fighters 32
U.S. Fifteenth Air Force, fighters 12

Total 44

(About 3,600 fighters)

102

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 124 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

This force compares with AWPD-1 and AWPD-42 in the
following manner:

Groups
AWPD-1, heavy bombers 44
AWPD-42, heavy bombers (including North 49
Africa and Middle East)
AWPD.-1, pursuit 21
AWPD-42, pursuit (including North Africa 39

and Middle East)

Until Big Week in the war on the German Air Force, the U.S.
Strategic Air Forces had been in a period of growth and adolescence,
perhaps “‘stunted growth” would be more accurate. The theories and
doctrines of the Air Corps Tactical School had been pursued with an
inspiring faith in spite of disappointments and the shocking effect of
air battles of unprecedented dimensions. But the real test, in terms of
results compared with plans and expectations, lay still ahead. The first
year of combat had sorely tried the basic concept that the bombers
could get through. When Kenneth N. Walker was a first lieutenant
and the bombardment instructor at Maxwell Field, he had stoutly
professed that “a properly planned and organized air attack, once
launched, cannot be stopped.” The realities of air combat had led to
modifications in equipment and tactics, but the spirit behind that
doctrine had not wilted in the heat of fire. But now, when the real
opportunity to apply strategic air power was here, other influences
rose to frustrate its achievement.

As the date for the invasion came closer, General Eisenhower was
concerned only with results that would be felt in time to assist troops
in establishing their beachhead. The factor which, second only to the
German Air Force, had been the greatest source of worry to the
ground commanders and planners responsible for the Normandy
invasion was the rate of buildup of Allied and German divisions in the
critical invasion area. Could the Allies transfer divisions and supplies
over the channel and across the open beaches faster than the Germans
could shift divisions by land to meet them? If the answer was “no,”

103

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 125 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

then the great adventure was doomed to failure, with international
effects difficult to visualize. One solution was to delay enemy
movements by air attacks, especially against the railroads.

Air Plans in Preparation for Overlord

When General Eisenhower arrived in England in January 1944,
bringing his Mediterranean Team with him, he also brought strong
convictions about the employment of strategic air forces which were
not in step with the convictions of the U.S. Strategic Air Forces
Commander. The SHAEF Team in the controversy consisted of RAF
Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur W. Tedder, RAF Air Chief Marshal Sir
Trafford L. Leigh-Mallory, and Lt. Gen. Lewis H. Brereton,
Commander of the U.S. Army Ninth Air Force. They advocated a
concentrated air offensive against rail communications in France,
involving some 75 to 110 rail bridges, marshaling yards, and
maintenance facilities—to make northern France a ‘railroad desert”
and hamper German movements to the Normandy beaches. All Allied
air forces, strategic as well as tactical, would be exclusively devoted to
this purpose. In the process it was hoped the remaining fighters of the
Luftwaffe would arise to the challenge, affording an opportunity to
reduce German air fighter forces by combat attrition. The campaign
was to begin as soon as possible after Big Week.

The strategic air war team in the controversy comprised General
Spaatz, U.S. Strategic Air Forces Commander, supported by General
Eaker and the Commanders of the Eighth and Fifteenth Air Forces
and Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur T. Harris, commanding RAF
Bomber Command. They proposed an intensive air offensive against
Germany until mid-May, then an interdiction campaign against
railroads in northern France. General Spaatz wished to focus on
German oil resources and production to dry up the gasoline resources
of German air and motorized units. The German fighter forces had
been crippled but not eliminated. Spaatz hoped by attacking oil to
reduce German air fighter forces through combat attrition. Spaatz
contended that the German fighter units were currently concentrated
in central Germany and the German fighters would have to remain

104

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 126 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

there and fight for their fuel sources if we continued the strategic air
offensive. They were not consolidated in France, and they would not
defend French railroads, even if we did assault them. In strategic air
attacks against oil, they could be pinned down in central Germany and
hence would not be used in Normandy. Spaatz asked for fifteen days
of visual bombing by the Eighth Air Force and ten by the Fifteenth
Air Force to pursue this strategy. About three weeks before D-day all
air forces would then turn to interdiction of communications in
France. Air Chief Marshal Harris decried the value of selective
precision bombing against the synthetic plants themselves, and
preferred area bombing against German cities. However, at first he
supported Spaatz and suggested that RAF Bomber Command cooper-
ate with U.S. Strategic Air Forces in attacking cities in central
Germany.

Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir Charles F. A. Portal
ultimately swung to the exclusive transportation plan (in France only)
proposed by Tedder and Leigh-Mallory, after the controversy had
become a major issue and Eisenhower had taken such a strong stand
for transportation. Spaatz appealed to General Arnold, but Arnold
refused to be drawn into the controversy, saying it was Eisenhower’s
right to decide. General Eaker came up from the Mediterranean
Theater and supported General Spaatz. On March 26, General
Eisenhower decided in favor of Tedder and Leigh-Mallory, endorsing
the transportation plan for air interdiction of France.

The German fighter forces were still formidable, and it was
essential they be kept away from the invasion area. For the defense of
the Normandy beaches the Germans had these aircraft:

On D-day 160 (80 operational)
Reinforcements in the
ensuing month totaled 600

Luftflotte I1I—facing

invasion—had by

the end of June 287 single-engine, day
89 single-engine, night

105

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 127 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

By the end of July 244 single-engine, day
404 single-engine, night

By the end of August 324 single-engine, day

By the end of September 296 single-engine, night

Luftflotte Reich—in central Germany and charged with the air
defense of vital installations of the interior—had:

Single Engine Twin Engine Night

In June 287 103 322
In July 311 257 102
In August 273 418
In September 420 665

Obviously it was important to keep these forces pinned down in
central Germany.

The control and direction of the strategic air forces passed to
General Eisenhower at the end of March (although the formal transfer
did not take place until midnight of April 13/14) and stayed there
until September 14, 1944. The problem associated with command was
as controversial as the plan for employment. Eisenhower was deter-
mined that his control of strategic air forces should be absolute and
untrammeled. Because he had been fearful of opposition in this regard
he was more adamant in his demands. Arnold had assured Eisenhower
personally just after his appointment as Supreme Commander, Allied
Expeditionary Forces, that he fully endorsed this demand.

General Spaatz was completely agreeable to this arrangement for
Overlord, that is to say, for the time needed to ensure success of the

106

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 128 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

invasion. Overlord was the campaign to establish a secure lodgment on
the Continent; it was not the campaign for the subsequent defeat of
Germany. Spaatz believed the maximum contribution of the strategic
air forces toward victory would be to destroy the war-supporting
structure of interior Germany. He wanted to resume the strategic air
war as soon as the success of the invasion was assured.

The British were reluctant to place Bomber Command and
Coastal Command under Eisenhower. They were willing for Fighter
Command to go with its Commander, Leigh-Mallory, into the Allied
Expeditionary Air Force for Overlord. This did not mean, however,
that Leigh-Mallory would be at liberty to transfer large blocks of
Fighter Command to the Continent. Fighter Command would return
to Air Ministry control once the Allied expeditionary forces were on
the Continent. Air Chief Marshal Leigh-Mallory considered that his
title as Air Commander in Chief, Allied Expeditionary Air Force,
should give him command of all air forces engaged in Overlord.

Air Chief Marshal Harris and General Spaatz were content to
come under the direction and control of General Eisenhower.
Nevertheless, the two were determined not to accept subordination to
Leigh-Mallory, whose knowledge of and attitude toward the use of
strategic air forces were held suspect by both. In this they were
supported by Generals Arnold and Marshall and by Marshal of the
Royal Air Force Sir Charles Portal. The issue was finally resolved by
placing the strategic air forces directly under General Eisenhower,
with Air Chief Marshal Tedder directing their operations in the
transportation plan (France) for Eisenhower and coordinating their
efforts with Leigh-Mallory.

There was lively dissent as to the most profitable way to disrupt
rail traffic: by attacking marshaling yards and railroad shop facilities,
or by destroying bridges. Both methods were tried, the latter proving
better on later examination. The overall result was satisfactory. The
U.S. and British strategic air forces and the medium bombers and
fighter-bombers of the U.S. Ninth Air Force devoted almost all of
May to assaulting rail transportation in France. The interdiction of
German rail movement to the Normandy area was effective. In the

107

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 129 ---
THE 91ST BOMB GROUP strikes enemy installations at
Oschersleben, Germany, on February 20, 1944.

‘

108

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 130 ---
109

Left: LT. GEN. JO-
SEPH T. MCNAR-
NEY, Army Deputy
Chief of Staff, (left)
and Gen. Carl Spaatz
visit the 381st’ Bomb
Group, Ridgewell, En-
gland, on April 19,
1944,

Below: ETO
COMMANDER LT.
GEN. JACOB L.
DEVERS, Secretary of
War Henry L. Stim-
son, and Maj. Gen. Ira
C. Eaker review bomb-
ing documents at
Thurleigh, England,
July 13, 1943.

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 131 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

words of General Spaatz, the attack on German transportation
“opened the door for invasion.”

To provide additional assurance against interference by the
German Air Force, intensive strikes were made on its nearby airfields.
By D-day the airfields in the area closest to Normandy had received
6,717 tons of bombs, 3,197 of which were delivered by the Ninth Air
Force, 2,638 by the Eighth, and the remaining 882 by the RAF.
Actually this was a normal and proper operation for the tactical air
forces, rather than the strategic air forces.

On the first day of the invasion, June 6, 1944, the Allied air forces
combined their strategic, tactical, and air defense components in direct
support of the landings. They launched 13,000 sorties that day. The
Luftwaffe was able to reply with about 300 sorties, producing literally
no effect whatever. Not a single daylight attack was made by the
Luftwaffe. One of the primary purposes prescribed in all the strategic
air plans (AWPD-1, AWPD-42, and the Combined Bomber Offen-
sive) had been accomplished. The Luftwaffe had been rendered
powerless to effectively oppose either the land invasion or the
continued air offensive.

After the lodgment in Normandy had been secured and the
breakthrough achieved at Saint-Lo, the Ninth U.S. Army Air Force
and the RAF Second Tactical Air Force, under general supervision of
Air Chief Marshal Leigh-Mallory, should have taken over the tactical
support function, leaving the strategic air forces free to resume their
mission of air warfare. After all, Eisenhower had in the Ninth Air
Force alone more combat aircraft than the Germans could muster in
the entire Luftwaffe. And in addition he had the Second Tactical Air
Force, RAF. Furthermore, the Luftwaffe had been defeated and
contained by the strategic air forces. However, shortly after D-day the
problem was complicated by the initiation of the German V—1 missile
attacks. Air defense of England fell upon RAF Fighter Command, and
naturally this responsibility was picked up by Leigh-Mallory. As the
assaults intensified, an alarmed British Government insisted that all
available means should be employed to alleviate them. Leigh-Mallory
concluded that the strategic bomber forces were best suited for this

purpose.

110

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 132 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

General Arnold had long since discovered that heavy bombers
were not the optimum weapon for destroying the very heavy structures
from which some of the missiles were launched. He had been at some
pains to find out the best method of attacking these structures.
Intensive photographic reconnaissance coupled with a commando raid
that had seized a set of construction drawings made it possible for
Arnold to construct a typical V-weapon site in Florida. Many attacks
were made upon the structures, using various size bombs and different
types of delivery. It was concluded that very-low-altitude assaults by
single fighter-bombers with 2,000-pound bombs were the most
destructive. Brig. Gen. Grandison Gardner—who had done so much
for the bombing probability methods at the Tactical School—
supervised the tests. He was sent to England to convey his results.

For some reason Leigh-Mallory was not impressed with these
experiments, asserting that the heavy bombers were the only salvation.
General Arnold’s restrained prodding did not move him. It was weeks
before he tried the low-altitude, fighter-bomber method, and then he
chose to use smaller bombs. Nonetheless the demonstration was
persuasive.

As a result of these controversies the Combined Bomber Offensive
suffered another serious setback. The primary targets of the CBO
slipped to third priority. It was a long time before most of the strategic
air forces were rescued from these diversions and redirected toward
their principal goals. As is always the case—the ground commander
was reluctant to release control after he had obtained it. And even
after direction of the strategic air forces had been returned to the
Combined Chiefs of Staff, General Eisenhower constantly demanded
their use.

Fortunately, General Eisenhower did respond in part to the
persistent arguments of General Spaatz and permitted the occasional
return of the strategic air forces to their primary objectives when he
felt that the immediate needs of the ground forces were not para-
mount. But the chief strategic targets in Germany were left relatively
free of the major power of the strategic air forces for slightly over
three months after the invasion—a total of about six and a half months
after Big Week. The strategic air forces were called upon frequently to

111

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 133 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

render close support in specific ground operations. This function they
performed with a promptness that confirmed both the virtue and the
weakness of flexibility in air forces.

At last on September 14, 1944, the U.S. Strategic Air Forces and
the RAF Bomber Command were permitted to resume the air
offensive described in the Combined Bomber Offensive, which the
Combined Chiefs of Staff had approved. But even after that, the
strategic air forces continued to be diverted to the support of the
ground campaigns, and just three-fifths of their might was directed
against the strategic targets in the interior of Germany.

With the beginning of the Combined Bomber Offensive, the basic
planning phase—that seemingly unexciting, largely unrecognized but
absolutely essential prelude to effective combat—was over. What
remained to be seen was whether the strategy so ardently and carefully
propounded would really be followed with unrelenting perseverance,
whether the forces called for would be provided or dissipated and
dispersed to other demands, and whether the effects of the bombing
offensive would bear out the contentions and expectations described in
AWPD-1.

It is far beyond my ability to adequately describe the frustrations,
disappointments, fragile hopes, determination, and soaring zeal that
were mixed in the cauldron to make AWPD-1 and the plans
modifying it. The frantic efforts to meet deadlines, the disagreements,
the uphill fight against entrenched and hostile opinion, the dedicated
crusade for the new role of air power, the slumbering dread that we
might be wrong—that we might persuade our leaders to take a path
that would lead to disaster—put a heavy burden on all of us, and
initially upon Lt. Col. Harold L. George (Air War Plans Division
Chief) in particular. We were, in truth, probing the future, seeking to
apply a doctrine conceived in theory and wanting the years of
experience that could point the path to follow. It was similar to our
attempts today to begin a space doctrine, before the risks are known,
before the technology needed if space became a battle area is a reality,
and before likely offensive measures and countermeasures can really
be described.

Back at the Air Corps Tactical School before the day of radar, the

112

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 134 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

theory of overflying an enemy’s armed force and striking the vital
element of his homeland seemed as simple as it was attractive. But
how to accomplish this feat against a great power, riding the crest of
victory and equipped with the latest creations of munitions technolo-
gy, was a practical problem of immense dimensions. Even if we
penetrated to the selected targets without unacceptable losses and
destroyed those targets, how could we predict with assurance the
effect upon the viability of the German nation? We could but use the
best intelligence available, and make the most careful estimates. This
we did with AWPD-1 and the follow-on plans. That the plans turned
out as well as they did was, in part, due to good fortune. But it was
also due in large measure to the years of debate at the Air Corps
Tactical School and, in no less degree, to men like Harold George who
had the vision to see the potential of air power and the courage to risk
their careers for what they felt was right. Such vision is rare. Moral
courage is rarer still, and the combination is truly priceless.

After the war, Harold George remarked to General Arnold that
AWPD-1, which had forecast the number of U.S. combat groups
within two percent and missed the final total of officers and men by
only five and a half percent, showed some pretty accurate forecasting.
“Quit slapping yourself on the back,” General Arnold said wryly.
“You’re not such a smart forecaster. We just followed your plan in
building the Army Air Forces. No wonder the results look the same.”

The force structure prescribed in AWPD-1 was mostly within the
power and control of General Arnold, once AWPD-1 had been
approved as a guide for production. But the strategic deployment and
employment of those forces as laid down in AWPD-1 were chiefly
outside his control. They were influenced by joint and combined
commands and alliances and subject to the vicissitudes and surprises
of the climate of war. These aspects of the plan fared well, but still
they bore the imprint of AWPD-1. Combat experience dictated
changes in tactics, but the basic strategic concepts and doctrines stood
up astonishingly well. Examination and analysis of the effects of the
strategic air offensive against Nazi Germany proved to be the “proof
of the pudding.”

113

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 135 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Change of Command

In December 1943 Maj. Gen. Ira C. Eaker suffered a traumatic
disappointment that would have broken a man of lesser fiber. When
General Eisenhower was selected to lead the invasion across the
English Channel and was designated Supreme Commander, Allied
Expeditionary Forces, at the Sextant Conference in Cairo in December
1943, he demanded the right to bring with him his principal team
members from the Mediterranean Theater. Among them were Lt.
Gen. Carl Spaatz and Maj. Gen. James H. Doolittle. This meant that
Eaker would be displaced as Commanding General, Eighth Air Force.

It was a staggering blow to Eaker, who had literally created the
Eighth Air Force, nursed it through an adolescence fraught with ills of
every sort, and brought it to full stature as a proud and effective
fighting machine. Now he was to leave it just as it was set to wage
decisive strategic air warfare. He protested in vain. On January 8,
1944, after a testimonial dinner by the RAF, he departed for the
Mediterranean Theater to become Commander in Chief, Mediterra-
nean Allied Air Forces. It was a position of responsibility and prestige,
but nothing could really compensate for the loss of the Eighth.

If the Eighth Air Force had to lose a gallant commander, it could
not have hoped for a better replacement. General Doolittle was a
charismatic leader and a superb tactician. One of his first and most
successful decisions came after Big Week. His forces, together with the
Fifteenth Air Force and the fighters of the Ninth Air Force in
England, broke the back of the German fighter force. He issued orders
for the release of the escort fighters to seek out and destroy the enemy
in the air wherever they were found. Under Doolittle’s command, the
Eighth showed what can be done with a fine instrument of air power.
The reports of the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey bear eloquent
testimony. In early 1944 General Doolittle ordered fighter
commanders to pursue until the German fighters were destroyed.
Commanders could exercise judgment in leaving the bombers to
search for the enemy, under the doctrine that such action accelerated
destruction of the German Air Force.

Fighters grew more numerous, and while going to and returning

114

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 136 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

from rendezvous they engaged and destroyed any enemy they could
find. Thus a virtual stream of fighters moved along the path of the
bombers from base to rendezvous to target and back to base. Increased
range made this possible. By March 1944, P—38s had a potential radius
of 585 miles; P-51Bs 650 miles with two 75—gallon tanks. This was
extended to 850 miles with 108-gallon tanks for P-51s. On May 29,
1944, P-51s furnished target support at Posen, Poland (over 700 miles
from base) and returned accompanying the bombers. In June, P~51s
flew escort all the way to Poltava in the Ukraine, (1,700 miles from
base) where bombers and fighters landed.

Beginning in August 1944, the combat boxes of the bombers
became smaller and columns longer. Fighter groups were split into
two 24-aircraft units, each having its own air commander. This
afforded flexibility of escort, allowing a combination of close support
and sweeping tactics that could be carried on simultaneously. This was
too much for the weakened Luftwaffe to fight against. Consequently, it
confined its attacks to bombers that were lost, though on occasion
exposed bomber groups were heavily assaulted, with severe losses. By
December 1944 the whole VIII Fighter Command was operating
P-51s, except for the 56th Fighter Group which retained P-47s. This
range extension was the final phase in the transformation of a fighter
force, having chiefly a protective escort function, into a much more
versatile one possessing offensive and harassing capabilities as well.

Evaluating the Strategic Bombing Campaign in Europe

The strategic bombing campaign has long been a subject of
intense controversy and may well remain so for years to come.
Certainly the moral issue will be debated as long as morality itself
lacks a confirmed definition. What actually happened to the war-
supporting structure of Germany as a result of strategic warfare? How
far did actual operations depart from the strategic plans?

Although the evidence is still interpreted in various ways, the
question as to what actually happened to the war-supporting structure
is well documented. Before the end of the war, Maj. Gen. Muir S.
Fairchild initiated and General Arnold carried out a bold and

115

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 137 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

statesman-like proposal. General Arnold requested that a special high-
level civilian committee make an immediate and thorough investiga-
tion of the effects of bombing in Germany. He asked that it be headed
by a citizen of unusually high repute who was untainted by philosophi-
cal leanings toward any type of warfare, in order that the report might
be as objective as possible. The committee should be commissioned by
the President himself and should report directly to him. It should be
dominated by civilians throughout and should use military men solely
to the extent it found their professional experience to be necessary and
helpful. Arnold persuaded Adm. Ernest J. King that the Navy should
be represented in the survey. Finally, General Arnold specifically
requested that the committee’s findings not be divulged to him or to
the senior commanders and staff of the Army Air Forces until the
report had been completed and submitted to the President.

As a result, the United States Strategic Bombing Survey was
established by the Honorable Henry L. Stimson, Secretary of War, on
November 3, 1944, pursuant to a directive from the President. The
Bombing Survey was headed by Franklin D’Olier as Chairman and
Henry C. Alexander as Vice Chairman. Directors included: George
W. Ball, Henry L. Bowman, John K. Galbraith, Rensis Likert, Frank
A. McNamee, Paul H. Nitze, Robert P. Russell, Fred Searls, Jr., and
Theodore P. Wright. Charles C. Cabot acted as Secretary.

These men, all with well-established reputations, set up an
organization calling for 300 civilians, 350 officers, and 500 enlisted
men. Headquarters were established in London, and teams operated
literally on the heels of advancing Allied armies. Several hundred
German plants, cities, and industrial areas were examined. Hundreds
of Germans were interrogated, among them the top German govern-
ment officials and the managers of the German industrial plants and
systems. Documents and reports were studied and analyzed. War
records were relentlessly ferreted out. Some 200 detailed reports were
made. It was a stupendous undertaking and a superb accomplishment.

First the bombing efforts were measured against the plans and
objectives. In 1941 the enemy’s armed forces appeared to be far too
powerful to be defeated by the Allies unless the state supporting them
could be fatally weakened by strategic air attack. The aim of our

116

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 138 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

strategic air plans, AWPD-1 and AWPD-42, was to destroy the
industrial fabric buttressing the military power and social order of
Germany. The purpose was to defeat the Third Reich by destruction
or paralysis of the vital organs of the state body, without invasion if
possible, or with it if need be. The original plans called for six months
of uninterrupted air attack to fatally weaken the Nazi state. This was
to take place before the final decision on whether to invade. The full
effect should be achieved before the invasion. Then, if necessary, two
months of preparatory air attack would follow in direct preparation
for it.

The Casablanca Directive, approved by the President and the
Prime Minister in January 1943, expressed the purpose of the air
assault, as a part of Allied grand strategy: “To bring about the
progressive destruction and dislocation of the German military,
industrial, and economic system, and the undermining of the morale of
the German people to a point where their capacity for armed
resistance is fatally weakened.”

The air plans called for providing and operating air forces that
could defeat the German fighter forces as an intermediate (counter-
Jorce) objective, and then achieve their principal purpose by destroying
and dislocating the countervalue system. The system encompassed
transportation, electric power (later dropped from the primary target
list by actions of the Committee of Operations Analysts), as well as
petroleum, ball-bearing, and various munitions factories (including
tank, rubber and chemical plants), and certain vital bases).

The air offensive by bombers and accompanying fighters attained
the intermediate objective—defeat of the German Air Force—during
Big Week in February 1944. This made possible the invasion at
Normandy in June. But the strategic bomber offensive suffered critical
delays that postponed the major air effort against some of the primary
targets until four months after the invasion. Obviously the grand
strategy had missed its timing. Instead of six months of air attack with
the force at full strength before the invasion, just two months of
strategic air attack were permitted before the invasion, then six
months of air support for the invasion and ground campaign. Not until
mid-September 1944 was the strategic air offensive resumed, and even

117

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 139 ---
EUROPEAN CAMPAIGN
PLANNED TIME PHASING - VICTORY PROGRAM

f BUILDING OF MERCHANT MARINE :
ARMY MOBILIZATION : PREP
© OVERSEAS TRANSPORTATION: FgR
GROUND “INVASION
24 oe ae] COMBINED
MOBILIZATION
AIR PRODUCTION be {In ar te | ; OPERATION
BASE CONSTRUCTION (IN ENG) ——m
QMONTHS =: QMONTHS _: G MONTHS :
M DAY D DAY
TIME PHASING - ACTUAL CAMPAIGN
GROUND z
31 MONTHS =
ACTUAL AIR
AIR OFFENSIVE

FRANCE
GER.

INVASION OF

: AIR:

: OFFENSIVE :

15 SEPT
JAN 42 JAN '43 JAN ‘44° JUN '44 JAN '45

“M” DAY 6 DEC “DO” DAY 6 JUNE

118

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 140 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

then forty percent of the bomb tonnage was delivered against targets in
support of the ground forces in France, instead of approved strategic
primary targets in Germany. The strategic air offensive, in spite of
delays and diversions, completed the “fatal weakening” of Germany
before a single Allied soldier had set foot on German soil. The
combined strategy would have better served the Allied cause if the
original plan had been followed. The effect of the bombing upon the
selected industrial and economic systems was catastrophic. The
strategic air forces finally returned to their primary objectives in
October 1944. In the next four months, the strategic air forces
completed all the remaining strategic objectives originally proposed.

Effects of the Strategic Air War against Europe

The brief digests that follow examine the effects of the Allied air
strategy against Germany. They include pertinent extracts from the
report of the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey.

The German Air Force

The long and bitter battle for control of the skies over Europe
culminated in victory in the spring of 1944. There was no German air
opposition to the landings in Normandy, and the strategic air forces
struck targets deep in Germany at will. The defeat of the German Air
Force was the consequence of many factors: destruction of manufac-
turing plants, combat attrition, disruption of training, and the loss of
aviation gasoline from attacks on the Rumanian oil fields and the
synthetic plants in Germany. (Synthetic production of aviation
gasoline suffered drastically.) The intensity of the bitter fighting in the
air was reflected in combat losses. Excluding the Russian front, the
Germans lost more than 22,000 fighters. The U.S. losses came to over
12,000 bombers and a like number of fighters.

Ball Bearings

The target was right but the bombs were too small and the
campaign was intermittent. There were two attacks in the fall of 1943.
Factory buildings were demolished, but heavy machinery on the

119

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 141 ---
TOTAL BOMB TONNAGE DROPPED
IN THE WAR FOR EUROPE

Tonnage dropped by R.A.F.

Tonnage dropped by U.S.A.A.F.

ASS

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 142 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

ground floor survived. The bombs should have been heavier
(2,000—-pounders instead of the 1,100-pounders and 500—pounders)
and the fuzes should have been set for longer delay so that the bombs
would reach the ground floor. And the attacks should have been
followed up more frequently to attain lasting effect.

Albert Speer, the German Minister of Armaments Production,
was asked after the war what would have happened if there had been
concerted and continuous attacks on the ball-bearing industry with
heavier bombs. He replied: ‘Armaments production would have been
crucially weakened after two months and after four months would
have been brought completely to a standstill. In those days, we
anxiously asked ourselves how soon the enemy would realize that he
could paralyze the production of thousands of armaments plants
merely by destroying five or six relatively small targets.”

Synthetic Petroleum

This target system received 13 percent of total bombs dropped,
almost all of it in late 1944 and early 1945. However, the system was
extremely sensitive. An attack on 7 plants by nearly 1,000 bombers on
May 12, 1944, sent German synthetic fuel production plummeting
from 380,000 metric tons a month to 80,000 metric tons in July and to
27,000 metric tons in September—a reduction of 93 percent. Although
there was a brief recovery to 80,000 tons again in November,
subsequent attack brought it to nearly zero by March 1945. Total
gasoline was reduced in like manner.

The oil campaign affected both the German air forces and ground
forces. Gen. Omar N. Bradley, interviewed for the USSBS, com-
mented:

With the debut of the German gamble in the Ardennes, lack of oil,
which the strategic bombing campaign had enforced upon the
enemy, told handsomely. The withdrawal of Sixth SS Panzer Army,
begun in daylight on January 22, 1945, was marked mainly by
successes of US fighter-bombers against its tanks and trucks. These
successes, however, took place against a background of painfully
exiguous oil reserve—with supply trucks being drained to fill the
tanks of fighting vehicles—and a long pull to the distant loading

121

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 143 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

stations. When the Allied breakthrough west of the Rhine followed
in February, across the Rhine in March, and throughout Germany
in April, lack of gasoline in countless local situations was the direct
factor behind the destruction or surrender of vast quantities of tanks
and trucks and of thousands upon thousands of enemy troops.

The effect spread to the Eastern Front as well; German forces
restricted by lack of gasoline were unable to cope with the Russian
onslaught. At the Baranov bridgehead, 1,200 German tanks, massed
to hold the position, were immobilized because they had no gasoline
and were overrun by the Russians. Even Marshal Joseph Stalin agreed
that the strategic air offensive against the oil resources played a vital
part in making possible Russian victories in the East.

Rubber

Synthetic rubber production, which relied upon nitrogen from the
synthetic gasoline production plants, suffered similar catastrophic
decay.

Ammunition

Ammunition production, which also relied upon the synthetic
petroleum plants for nitrogen, showed a similar precipitous decline.
The Germans had a huge increase in ammunitions requirements in
mid-1944, just after the Allies’ successful D-day landings at Norman-
dy and reversals in Russia. Allied bombing of oil-chemical plants
brought the explosives industry to almost a complete standstill. The
USSBS reported:

By February 1945 German explosives production, exclusive of
extenders, had been reduced drastically to 8500 tons per month.
This decline came at a time when the Germans were fighting on two
fronts and consumption was at a peak. Stocks which were ample in
mid-1944 evaporated. Thousands of finished shell casings remained
unfilled and the Germans were forced on occasion to use as high as
70 percent rock salt to stretch the small supply of explosives.

Transportation

This system received thirty-two percent of the total bomb tonnage

122

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 144 ---
TOTAL GERMAN SYNTHETIC FUEL PRODUCTION
BY PROCESS

TOTAL
SYNTHETIC
PRODUCTION

/ 4 AVIATION
: ‘GASOLINE
PRODUCTION

Thousands MONTHLY AVERAGES
of metric
Een” | 1940 | 1941 | 1942 | 1943 | 1945 |
month
SrEeccccnss

THOUSANDS OF TONS ALLIED BOMBS TO HAVE HIT PLANTS

SOURCE: USS. strategic bombing survey

123

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 145 ---
GERMAN EXPLOSIVES PRODUCTION

r\ roca na
OS 60
- ] {
\ / \
\ 7 \

Alt Explosives

\ on ee

Synthetic Nitrogen

20

10

124

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 146 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

dropped in Europe. Although the attacks came late in the war, they
were decisive. The USSBS described the situation:

After the September and October [1944] attacks, it became entirely
impossible for the railroad system to meet . . . transportation
requirements. The evidence indicated that the supply of critical
components in the hands of manufacturers was quickly exhausted,
with a resulting severe impact on virtually all munitions and other
finished products at roughly the same time in late November and
early December.

Since the loss of transportation facilities completely disorganized
the flow of basic raw materials and components, production of
semifinished materials was no longer possible. The effects of the
strategic air attacks upon rail and water transportation were almost
exactly as envisioned in AWPD-1 and AWPD-42. Coal could not be
moved to the steel plants and power stations, and the coal shortage
interfered with rail movement. Component parts could not be moved
to the assembly plants, and the plants themselves could not operate.
The industrial fabric of the whole German state was ripping and
unraveling.

This was not caused by foreign armies occupying German soil, for
in January 1945 the German frontiers were still intact. It was caused
by the air offensive, and the plunge in transportation capacity was
lethal and irreversible. Transportation is just as vital to the corporate
life of an industrial state as the flow of blood is vital to the life of the
human body. The level of coal stocks for the railroads dropped to 18
days in October 1944 and to 414 days in February 1945. Under these
conditions, orderly production for civilian as well as military usage
was now impossible. The steel industry, for example, dropped its
output 89 percent in the first quarter of 1945 as compared with its
production of 9 million tons in the first quarter of 1944. Destruction of
German transportation had undermined the whole industrial and
economic structure of the state. The U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey
stated:

The attack on transportation beginning in September 1944 was the

125

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 147 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

most important single cause of Germany’s ultimate economic
collapse. From December 1944 onward, all sectors of the German
economy were in rapid decline. Even if the final military victories
that carried the allied armies across the Rhine and Oder had not
taken place, armament production would have come to a vital
standstill by May; the German armies, completely bereft of
ammunition and motive power, would almost certainly have had to
cease fighting by June or July.

John K. Galbraith, Harvard economist and a Director of the
Bombing Survey, presented a totally false picture when he said the
strategic air offensive against Germany was a failure and that German
industry actually thrived on bombing. German industry did thrive for
two and a half years before the bombing really began in force. Under
the genius of Albert Speer, German production of munitions actually
tripled between 1942 and mid-1944. But when the heavy bombing of
Germany finally began in September 1944, the output of munitions
plunged dramatically. This effect reached a climax in four months of
heavy bombing. But even then about two-fifths of the bombs dropped
by strategic air forces between mid-September 1944 and mid-January
1945 were diverted to targets outside Germany.

Combat munitions included aircraft, ammunition, weapons,
tanks, and ships. As shown on the chart, after the bombing of German
targets rose from about 40,000 tons in August to a peak of nearly
200,000 tons in February, the index of combat munitions production
dropped steeply from about 315 to about 140 on its way to zero 2
months later.

Strategic Bombing Survey Conclusions

The Strategic Bombing Survey gave as one of its major conclu-
sions:

The attack on transportation was the decisive blow that
completely disorganized the German economy. It reduced war
production in all categories and made it difficult to move what was
produced to the front. The attack also limited the tactical mobility

126

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 148 ---
NET TON-KILOMETERS
IN MILLIONS

NET TON-KILOMETERS
MOVED PER MONTH
BY GERMAN RAILWAYS

1944-1945

JFMAMJJASONDUFMA

TONS OF BOMBS
DROPPED

TONS OF BOMBS
DROPPED AGAINST
GERMAN RAILWAYS

BY U.S.
STRATEGIC AIR FORCES
AND
RAF BOMBER COMMAND

1944-1945

JFMAMJJASONDJFMA

127

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 149 ---
COMBAT MUNITIONS PRODUCTION IN GERMANY (USSBS)

COMBAT MUNITIONS

INCLUDES AIRCRAFT, AMMUNITION,
WEAPONS, “PANZER”, AND NAVAL
CONSTRUCTION

INDEX JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1942=100

1942 1943 1944 1945

200,000
COMBINED TOTAL BOMB TONNAGE
DROPPED BY US STRATEGIC AIR
FORCE AND RAF BOMBER COMMAND
150,000

Y TARGETS OTHER
V4 THAN GERMANY 100,000

TARGETS IN
GERMANY

50,000

25,000

128

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 150 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

of the German Army.*

By the beginning of 1945, before the invasion of the homeland
itself, Germany was reaching a state of helplessness. Her armament
production was falling irretrievably, orderliness in effort was
disappearing, and total disruption and disintegration were well
along. Her armies were still in the field. But with the impending
collapse of the supporting economy, the indications are convincing
that they would have had to cease fighting—any effective fighting—
within a few months. Germany was mortally wounded.

Even if the final military victories that carried the Allied
armies across the Rhine and the Oder had not taken place,
armament production would have come to a virtual standstill by
May. The indications were convincing that the German armies,
completely bereft of ammunition and motive power, would have
had to cease fighting—any effective fighting—within a few months.
In the actual case—as in most others in the history of wars—the
collapse occurred before the time when the lack of means had
rendered further resistance physically impossible.

The creation of this condition was the intent of all the strategic air
plans and should have been achieved before the 1944 invasion of the
Continent. The diversion of the strategic air effort, with the subse-
quent delay in effect, was a tragic mistake.

In his report to Hitler on March 15, 1945, Albert Speer stated
flatly: “The German economy is heading for an inevitable collapse
within four to eight weeks.” Some time later, looking back at the
strategic air assault, the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey also conclud-
ed: “Allied airpower was decisive in the war in western Europe.”
Noting that air power might have been employed more effectively at
various times and places, the Bombing Survey’s final report still
stressed: “Its power and superiority made possible the success of the
invasion. It brought the economy which sustained the enemy’s armed
forces to a virtual collapse [emphasis added], although the full effects
of this collapse had not reached the enemy’s front lines when they
were overrun by Allied forces.” The survey might have noted that the
collapse of interior Germany led to the ensuing chaos and incipient

*USSBS Summary Report: European War, Sep 30, 1945, p 12.

129

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 151 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

anarchy. This condition, which typified interior Germany in mid-
January 1945, had been brought about by strategic warfare. Germa-
ny’s frontiers were still intact at that time, and the U.S. air offensive
had been superbly effective while causing minimum loss of civilian
lives. “The capability of the armed forces to fight,” the “will to resist”
of the people, and the functioning of vital systems and structures of the
German state had been fatally weakened, and inevitable surrender was
already assured. The tremendous power of strategic air attack against
industrial systems, using conventional bombs dropped with reasonable
accuracy against well-selected targets, was clearly demonstrated.

Other Potential Target Systems

Among the errors of omission which characterized our strategic
air assault, two target systems stand out: grinding wheel manufacture
and the German electric power system.

Grinding Wheels

In an introductory essay for Impact, an official AAF photograph-
ic magazine published during the war and reprinted in 1980, Albert
Speer said:

Every. organism has certain vital nerve fibers: sever these and
complete paralysis can result. For example, one, inconspicuous
item, for lack of which the entire armaments industry would have
been crippled, was the production of abrasives. Only eight small
plants manufactured the indispensable grinding wheels without
which no gun barrel, no crankshaft, no shell could be turned out.
Those eight factories were easy to find; the glow of the big
carborundum smelting furnaces could be seen far into the night.
Given the tedious processing involved in the making of abrasives,
destruction of these factories would have halted production for a
year, but after only half a year the manufacture of virtually all
armaments would have come to a standstill.

The Committee of Operations Analysts had been correct in
predicting precisely what Speer said. They listed grinding wheels in
fourth priority, right after the German aircraft industry, ball bearings,

130

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 152 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

and petroleum. We operating people in the Eighth Air Force, who
prepared the plan for the Combined Bomber Offensive, were at fault in
passing over this target system. To be sure, we lacked target
intelligence that would have let us make operational plans for this
system. However, we could have requested the gathering of this
information, which we failed to do.

Electric Power

As for German electric power, it was unfortunately eliminated as
a target by the Committee of Operations Analysts, on the grounds that
its paralysis was beyond the capability of the strategic air force. It was
dropped from second priority to thirteenth.

In the same essay, Speer commented on the German electric
power systems:

Our production of electricity was being used to the limit, and there
was no reserve capacity. Every loss meant reducing production by a
corresponding amount. Possibly there would have been great
difficulties in knocking out the hydro-electric plants,* as the attacks
on the Mohne Valley dam showed, but the loss of some twenty
major power plants would have constituted the final catastrophe. If
in addition the transformer stations, such as Braunweiler, Herber-
tingen and Ernsthofen, among others, had been put out of action,
this worst bottleneck in our industry would have been doubly
shattered, for, as we discovered to our alarm, both the steam-power
plants and the transformer stations were extremely sensitive even to
accidental bomb hits. And ultimately, to note a third crucial factor,
it would have been possible to attack the over-land transmission
lines, which stretched for thousands of miles. These could scarcely
have been protected from low-flying planes. With all the other
essentials, such as fuel or rubber or ball-bearings, there was always a
reserve stock, not to mention what was already in the pipe line to
insure smooth distribution. Thus in all such cases we could have
stretched our supplies for many months, even if production were
halted. Electricity alone could not be stockpiled, and we need only

*The hydroelectric plants were an unreliable and inconstant source of dependable power,
since their output varied with the seasonal flow of water from the Alps. They provided only
about eleven percent of power and were used to meet peak loads when they were available.

131

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 153 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

remember the consequences of a blackout in New York City that
lasted just a few hours!

Finally Speer had this to say on the subject:

According to the estimates of the Reich, a loss of sixty percent of
the total power production would have sufficed to lead to collapse
of the entire network. The destruction of the power plants would be
the most radical measure, as it would at once lead to a breakdown
of all industry and support of public life. Destruction of fifty-six
targets would produce this effect.

Would it have been possible to paralyze the German electric
power system besides accomplishing the other results that were
actually attained? A postwar analysis, using actual bombing perfor-
mance demonstrated by the Eighth Air Force, shows clearly that this
would have been possible if the strategic air forces had been applied for
two and a half months against the primary targets in Germany
proposed in AWPD-1 and AWPD-42 immediately after defeat of the
German Air Force, rather than applied in large measure against
targets in France in preparation for the invasion and in support of the
ground campaign. The subject is treated in some detail in the
Appendix, but the conclusions are summarized below.

The task of knocking out the electric power system actually was
much less difficult than knocking out the synthetic oil production—
and keeping it out. The tonnage of bombs required, to provide a
95-percent probability of knocking out 2/3 of the electric power
system (65 targets), came to 35,000 tons. This was a relatively small
portion of the total effort available in March, April, and May of
1944— before the invasion. During this period the U.S. strategic air
forces flew over 60,000 bombing sorties and dropped 150,000 tons of
bombs, of which only 6,080 tons was directed against petroleum
targets. Thirty-five thousand tons would have been 23 percent of the
tonnage dropped by these forces on targets predominantly in France
during this period. The tonnage actually dropped, exclusive of the oil
targets in Germany, between March 1 and May 15 was sufficient to
have caused paralysis of the German electric power system before the

132

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 154 ---
EXECUTION AND EVALUATION

invasion, and still have left 15 days of operations in May for attack of
rail transportation in France to the extent of 96,000 tons.

I believe the answer to the question “could the German electric
power system have been paralyzed before the invasion?” to be “yes.”
In combination with the attacks on German transportation and
synthetic petroleum systems, the result would have been even more
catastrophic to the “will” and “capability” of Germany to continue
the war. Whether the German electric power system could have been
paralyzed before the invasion is questionable in view of General
Eisenhower’s vehement support of the air attack on rail transportation
in France. But it certainly could have been accomplished immediately
after the invasion. German electric power had been No. 2 priority
(next after the defeat of the Luftwaffe) in AWPD-1 and No. 4 priority
in AWPD-42.

The chief electrical engineer in charge of design of the system
volunteered this information: “The war would have been finished two
years sooner if you concentrated on the bombing of our power plants.”

133

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 155 ---
A DIRECT HIT AT THE MUSASHINO AIRCRAFT EN-
GINE PLANT dug this crater and destroyed half of the
industrial target, located on the outskirts of Tokyo.

134

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 156 ---
Chapter IV

Planning the Strategic
Air War against Japan

Grand strategy for the Pacific began to receive formal reexamina-
tion at the Quebec (Quadrant) Conference of the Combined Chiefs of
Staff, held at Quebec in August 1943. The conclusions of the
conference made no mention of a specific bomber offensive against
Japan. However, there was agreement on the overall strategic
objectives for the prosecution of the war:

1. In cooperation with Russia and other Allies to bring about
at the earliest possible date the unconditional surrender of the Axis
in Europe.

2. Simultaneously, in cooperation with other Pacific Powers
concerned, to maintain and extend unremitting pressure against
Japan with the purpose of continually reducing her military power
and attaining positions from which her ultimate surrender can be
forced. The effect of any such extension on the over-all objectives to
be given consideration by the Combined Chiefs of Staff before
action is taken.

3. Upon the defeat of the Axis in Europe, in cooperation with
other Pacific Powers and, if possible, with Russia, to direct the full
resources of the United States and Great Britain to bring about at
the earliest possible date the unconditional surrender of Japan.

135

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 157 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

There were two specific agreements made at Quadrant that would
affect the air operations in the Far East.

We are agreed that the re-orientation of forces from the
European Theater to the Pacific and Far East be started as soon as
the German situation, in our opinion, so allows.

General Stilwell will be Deputy Supreme Allied Commander
South East Asia Theater and in that capacity will command the
Chinese troops operating into Burma and all US air and ground
forces committed to the South East Asia Theater.

The plan for defeat of Japan would be taken up at the Sextant
Conference [held at Cairo, Egypt, in the late November-early
December 1943].

President Roosevelt headed the U.S. delegation at the Cairo
(Sextant) Conference. With him were his personal military aide, Maj.
Gen. Edwin M. “Pa” Watson; the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Gen. George
C. Marshall, Adm. Ernest J. King, Gen. Henry H. Arnold); Adm.
William D. Leahy; Maj. Gen. Muir Fairchild, AAF, from the Joint
Strategic Survey Committee; Maj. Gen. Laurence S. Kuter, Deputy
Chief of Staff, AAF; the Joint Plans Committee; and the Joint
Logistics Committee, among others. The Joint Staff planners consisted
of Brig. Gen. Frank N. Roberts, USA; Rear Adm. Bernhard H. Bieri,
USN, formerly of the Joint Strategic Committee; and myself, recently
returned from the Eighth Air Force. For this occasion Admiral Bieri,
the senior member and chairman, chose to consider there were just
two legitimate members of the Joint Plans Committee, one represent-
ing the War Department, the other the Navy Department. He
considered me, if he noted my presence at all, as a sort of junior
consultant to Frank Roberts on air matters.

Because Admiral Bieri would not bring himself to recognize my
existence, he could not very well argue against the items I presented
and supported. The chief air objectives I supported were: (1)
Consolidating our strategic air forces under unified air command and
control, both in Europe and in the Pacific; (2) Recognizing strategic
air warfare as a principal, war-winning strategy, and its acceptance as
such in the war against Japan; (3) Obtaining air base sites from which

136

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 158 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

strategic air warfare could be waged against Japan. General Roberts
was cooperative, and I was able to get the Joint Plans Committee to
agree to all of the important things affecting the air forces.

Long before the proposed invasion of Normandy, General Arnold
had sought to strengthen the strategic air forces opposing the
European Axis powers, through merger and establishment of a unified
air command. The Eighth Air Force in England and the Northwest
African Strategic Air Force should have been directed in a coordinat-
ed attack against the selected targets in Germany. But they were
separated by command barriers. The strategic air forces in England
operated under the direction of the Combined Chiefs of Staff, with Air
Chief Marshal Sir Charles F. A. Portal as executive agent. The
strategic air forces in the Mediterranean were under the theater
commander in that area, an Army general. They were being used to
support theater objectives. General Arnold endeavored to correct this
fault by merging the command of the USS. strategic air forces in both
areas under a single U.S. strategic air commander, who would have
authority to direct all European strategic air operations.

As the Army Air Forces’ air planner, I succeeded with some
difficulty in putting the issue through the Joint Plans Committee of
the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff. As the American air member of the
US.-British Joint and Combined Plans Committee, it was my job to
put it through that committee at the Cairo Conference. It met stiff
opposition from the British members. They pointed out that the
strategic air forces in the Mediterranean were wholly dependent upon
theater agencies for logistic support and administration. Our conten-
tion was that unity of command and concerted cooperation in the
target area were more important than unity of command of logistics
and administration in the base areas. The British, who had the overall
command of all air forces in the Mediterranean, were quick to oppose
a change that would rob their senior air commander in the Mediterra-
nean of a large block of his air power. They stressed the complexities
of logistic support and the fact that the U.S. strategic air forces in the
Mediterranean were completely dependent upon the common logistic
facilities. A separate operational command would still be at the mercy
of the logistic allocations and capacity. Why not leave the command

137

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 159 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

chain as it was and direct the U.S. strategic air commander in the
Mediterranean to cooperate and coordinate with his opposite number
in England? This would, of course, leave the strategic air forces in the
Mediterranean under the command of the local theater commander,
who could use them as he deemed necessary and leave the arguments
to be settled later.

In the final confrontation we prevailed, asserting that the RAF
did in fact have unity of command of its own air forces through the
Air Ministry, and that this practice bridged the boundaries between
theaters. Why should not the American strategic air forces have a
similar structure and unity of command?

The argument and agreement that unity of command and control
over air operations to be exercised at the target areas was more
important than that covering the base areas later served us in good
stead when the Twentieth Air Force was created. The outcome of the
issue at the Cairo Conference was the creation of the U.S. Strategic
Air Forces in Europe and the organization of the Fifteenth (Strategic)
Air Force in the Mediterranean as the second component (along with
the Eighth) of that strategic force.

Even this consolidation could not prevent frequent diversion of
strategic air forces from their primary mission to the support of local
ones. Without this unified command, however, the diversions would
have been far worse. Airmen grew distrustful of the powers of surface
theater commanders. When the time for organization and command of
air forces in the war against Japan came up for consideration, the fight
was renewed on a broader scale. But command of strategic air forces
in Europe was not the only air issue at Cairo.

I had returned from England to become the U.S. air member of
the Joint Plans Committee just about four weeks before departing for
the Cairo (Sextant) Conference in November 1943. During my
preparation for the conference, I was surprised by one paper I came
across. It was the outline of the proposed Joint War Plan for the
conduct of the war in the Pacific. The opening statement of basic
strategy, prepared by the Far East War Plans Group and endorsed by
the Joint War Plans Review Board (which contained an Army Air
Forces general officer), said in effect:

138

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 160 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

It has been clearly demonstrated in the war in Europe that strategic
air forces are incapable of decisive action and hence the war against
Japan must rely upon victory through surface forces, supported
appropriately by air forces. Final victory must come through
invasion of the Japanese home islands.

There was no dissenting voice from the air members of the
committee and the review board. The draft plan had been sent to the
various members of the Joint Plans Committee in October 1943. To be
sure, the bombing offensive against Germany had not yet shown
decisive capability. It had not yet been launched in strength and would
not reach full power and application against primarily strategic targets
in Germany for almost another year. And nothing had been demon-
strated either for or against the potential of that strategic air offensive.
But it was clearly evident the Far East War Plans Group and the Joint
War Plans Review Board had written off the possibility of victory over
Japan through final reliance on air power and were dedicated to
victory through invasion. I knew that the Army and Navy members of
the Joint Plans Committee would welcome this conclusion. With
much difficulty I succeeded in amending that statement of basic
strategy and establishing a provision for an initial potentially decisive
strategic air offensive against the Japanese home islands. It was agreed
preparations for invasion should proceed concurrently, in case such an
air offensive should not be decisive. Strategic air power barely attained
a reprieve, and strategic air forces gained a temporary stay against
dismemberment and apportionment to various theaters for support of
surface operations. But final reliance on surface invasion of the
Japanese home islands was indelibly imprinted on Allied grand
strategy, at least so far as the U.S. Army and Navy were concerned.

At Cairo I succeeded in making a very substantial change in the
original statement of a grand strategy for the Pacific. The Combined
Chiefs of Staff accepted and approved the “overall plan for the defeat
of Japan” as submitted by the Combined Staff planners on December
2, 1943. The new description of grand strategy stated:

Our studies of the subject (of grand strategy) have taken account of
the possibility that invasion of the principal Japanese islands may

139

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 161 ---
GENERAL ARNOLD AND HIS AIR STAFF at the Cairo
(Sextant) Conference of November 1943. The delegation was led
by (front row, left to right) Brig. Gen. Hansell, Maj. Gen. Muir S.
Fairchild, General Arnold, Brig. Gen. Laurence S. Kuter, and
Col. Willard R. Wolfinbarger.

GEN. GEORGE C.
MARSHALL (right)
and General Arnold
meet with the Com-
bined Chiefs of Staff
at Cairo’s Mena
House Hotel, De-
cember 4, 1943.

140

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 162 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

not be necessary and the defeat of Japan may be accomplished by
sea and air blockade and intensive air bombardment from progres-
sively advanced bases. The plan must, however, be capable of
expansion to meet the contingency of an invasion.

At another point the Combined Chiefs agreed to this overall objective
among others: “To obtain objectives from which we can conduct
intensive air bombardment and establish a sea and air blockade against
Japan and from which to invade Japan proper if this should be
necessary.”

I also succeeded in inserting a sentence in a paragraph of “Specific
Operations for the Defeat of Japan, 1944,” which was approved by the
Combined Chiefs of Staff on December 3, 1943. The paragraph read:

Central, South, and Southwest Pacific. The advance along the
New Guinea-Netherlands East Indies-Philippines axis will proceed
concurrently with operations for the capture of the Mandated
Islands (by then the Central Pacific). A strategic bombing force will
be established in Guam, Tinian, and Saipan for strategic bombing of
Japan proper. Air bombardment of targets in the Netherlands East
Indies-Philippine Area and the aerial neutralization of Rabaul will
be intensified.

The strategy underlying the bombing of Japan proper was similar
to that applied against Germany: to defeat the enemy air force and to
so weaken the Japanese capability and will to fight as to cause
capitulation or permit occupation against disorganized resistance;
failing this, to make invasion feasible at minimum cost.*

The position of air strategists regarding the air offensive against
Japan was very weak in November 1943. B-29s were beginning to
come off the line, but essential bases for their operation against the
Japanese home islands had not yet been provided. General Arnold and
his Air Staff were determined to employ B-29s against the Japanese
homeland. We were extremely apprehensive lest they be apportioned
to theater commanders for local operations. Once assigned to such

*The expression “occupation,” as distinct from “invasion,” was deliberately inserted by the
airmen in Sextant discussions.

141

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 163 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

control, it would be hard to extricate them and concert their efforts
against the prime targets in Japan.

Operation Matterhorn

An outline plan was prepared in August 1943 by the Air War
Plans Division of the Air Staff for use of the B-29s from bases to be
built by the forces of Chiang Kai-shek in China. It was the only way
we could find to start using these aircraft (however ineffectively)
against Japan proper, prior to the capture of the Marianas.

The idea of basing strategic bombers in China was not entirely
new. At the Casablanca Conference in January 1943, President
Roosevelt discussed with Prime Minister Churchill the possibility of
air operations out of Chinese bases against the Japanese. General
Marshall endorsed General Arnold’s view that Japanese industry was
very vulnerable to bombardment from the air. The President added
that periodic bombing of Japan would have a tremendous effect upon
the morale of the Chinese people. He suggested sending 200 to 300
planes to China, including heavy bombers (B-24s), and proposed that
the bombers be based in India and staged through advanced bases in
China.

The President had gone so far as to wire Chiang Kai-Shek that he
was sending General Arnold to Chungking to discuss U.S. aid because
he was ‘determined to increase General Chennault’s air force* in
order that you may carry the offensive to the Japanese at once.”
However, this reference was evidently to the Japanese in China, not to
Japan proper. In August 1943, a new outline plan for using B-29s
based in India and staged through China to attack the Japanese home
islands was first presented to the Combined Chiefs of Staff by General
Arnold at the Quebec (Quadrant) Conference. The plan was tabled
there for study by the Joint Logistics Committee and restudy at the
Cairo (Sextant) Conference in November.

AWPD-42 had listed “iron and steel” as a primary target system

*Brig. Gen. Claire L. Chennault was commanding the newly created AAF Fourteenth Air
Force, stationed at various airfields in China. At the same time, he was air advisor to Chiang
Kai-shek and Chief of Staff for Air of the Chinese Air Force.

142

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 164 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

in the air offensive against the Japanese home islands. The Committee
of Operations Analysts agreed that iron and steel were vital, both to
the war-making capabilities of Japan and to the economic structure of
the state. Steel production was in short supply and was running about
9.5 million tons per year. The consumption was divided equally
between military and civilian usage. The following table shows the
extent to which steel was vital in both categories:

Consumption Group Tons (Thousand) Percent
Military and Naval
Aircraft 190 2.02
Armored fighting vehicles 142 1.51
Ammunition 1,800 19.15
Artillery & small arms 190 2.02
Miscellaneous field equipment 998 10.62
Shipbuilding 950 10.11
Buildings & works 430 _4.57
Subtotal 4,700 50.00

Industrial and Civilian

Buildings & works 430 4.57
Storage & transport 380 4.04
Mining & quarrying 470 5.00
Carbonization industry 190 2.02
Agricultural machinery 95 1.01
Machinery, equipment, tools 475 5.05
Railways 1,140 12.13
Motor vehicles 190 2.02
Chemical & electrical industry 380 4.04
Miscellaneous 950 10.11
Subtotal 4,700 49.99 (50.00)
Total 9,400 100.00

The Committee of Operations Analysts found that in Japan the
steel production was uniquely vulnerable, because of the heavy
concentration of coke ovens upon which steel production depended.
Six coking plants (3 in the Japanese southern island of Kyushu, 2 near
Mukden in Manchuria, and 1 in Korea) produced 73 percent of

143

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 165 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Japanese coke. The Committee of Operations Analysts said the
destruction of these 6 coking plants would deprive Japan of 66 percent
of her total steel output. Coke ovens were susceptible to shock and
their replacement would take years. The Air War Plans Division
proposed that B-29s be based in India and operated from advanced
bases in China, within range of some or all of these coking plants. The
vicinity of Chengtu, China, was the preferred forward base. The
location, relative importance, and approximate distance of these plants
from Chengtu were:

Percent of Miles from
Plant Location Production Chengtu
Anshan (near Mukden, Manchuria) 34.5 1,350
Penchihu (near Mukden, Manchuria) 11.2 1,300
Kenjiho, Korea 3.6 1,400
Yawata (Kyushu, Japan) (1) 16.2 1,500
Yawata (Kyushu, Japan) (2) 3.9 1,500
Omuta (Kyushu, Japan) 3.3 1,475

Chengtu, China, was situated about 1,150 miles from Calcutta, India.

General Arnold directed Brig. Gen. Kenneth B. Wolfe, who was
to command the first combat unit of B-29 bombers—the XX Bomber
Command—to prepare an outline operational plan to carry out
attacks on these targets. General Wolfe’s plan was expanded by the
Air War Plans Division and became Project Matterhorn.

The strategic purpose and concept of Project Matterhorn were
sound. But the logistic requirements were staggering and the logistic
plan was horrendous. Based in India, the B-29s would stage through
advanced bases in China. Even if the Chinese could be persuaded to
build the air bases, it would be necessary to support B—29 operations
from the advanced bases by air supply over the Himalayas. The B—29s
themselves would have to ferry bombs and gasoline over “the Hump,”
and supply would have to be supplemented by B—24s converted into
tankers. The effective rate of the operations would be very low indeed.
Their primary virtue would be in striking an important blow against
Japan proper and in preserving the command-and-control structure,

144

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 166 ---
NV390 Did|OVd

NHSNOH DUHSNS

OYIHSNX
OaI¥NXOH

XE

YAIHSOO vy

Nvd¥f 40 Vas

V35 WNIHD LSv4

was MOTIIA

NVZN39

VIBNHONWW

145

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 167 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

pending a time when other Pacific bases could be captured and
prepared for other B—29 forces.

Chiang Kai-shek, who was present at the Cairo Conference in
November—December 1943, agreed to the base construction at Cheng-
tu. He was as good as his word. The bases were hand constructed by
hundreds of thousands of workers.

Actually, Project Matterhorn had a painful birth and a brief life
span. Under General Kuter’s supervision, the Air Plans Division of
the Air Staff planned Matterhorn. General Arnold presented the final
plan to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and, after some discussion, they, at
General Arnold’s request, referred it to the Joint Staff planners (before
my arrival in that committee). These planners and the Joint Intelli-
gence Committee seriously questioned if the concept was desirable and
feasible. Nevertheless, it was sent to the Combined Staff planners for
comment or agreement.

The overall objective of Matterhorn was to accelerate the
destruction of selected systems of critical Japanese industry. This
would reduce the industrial support of the Japanese war effort as a
contribution to the overall strategic air plan. The plan, like that in
Europe, contemplated an intermediate objective, the neutralization of
the Japanese Air Force by combat and by destroying aircraft and
engine factories. Then would come the destruction of primary targets
whose paralysis would lead to fatal weakening (or collapse) of the
Japanese will to resist and capability to continue the fight. Operations
from Chinese bases would further this objective and reduce Japanese
shipbuilding and naval resources. This would directly assist the later
major air offensive from the Marianas. The plan called for 4 advanced
bases near Chengtu to be furnished by the Chinese, and 4 main bases
in the vicinity of Calcutta, India, to be provided by the British. Ten
B—29 groups (28 aircraft per group) were to be ready by October 1944
for deployment to India and operation from China. Two thousand
B—24s converted to transports were to support such operations over
the Hump from supply bases around Calcutta. These 2,000 converted
aircraft could be made available in the Calcutta area by October 1944.

The Combined Logistic Committee concluded on September 14,
1943, that the plan was not feasible from a logistic viewpoint. General

146

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 168 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

Arnold received this negative opinion of the Matterhorn proposal just
before he departed for the Cairo (Sextant) Conference. Even so, he
asked the Committee of Operations Analysts to give him a list of
recommended targets in Japan for the final air offensive, and show
which targets could be included in the initial operations from Chinese
bases. The plan would embody the operations from other bases.
Targets would be those suitable for air bombardment that would
“knock Japan out of the War.” Iron and steel were high on the list.

The operations analysts described seven industries which “now
appear profitable aviation target systems,” and listed thirteen others
which “did not now appear to be profitable” but might become so. The
seven preferred target systems were:

a. Merchant shipping in harbors and at sea.

b. Iron and steel production, to be reached through coke ovens (in
Manchuria, Korea, and Kyushu, within range of Chengtu).

c. Urban industrial areas vulnerable to incendiary attacks.

d. Aircraft plants.

e. The antifriction bearing industry, highly concentrated in six main
factories.

f. The electronic industry whose interruption would have immediate
military effects.

g. The petroleum industry.

The Committee of Operations Analysts contended, however, that the
list was not in an order of desired priority.

In spite of all the criticism and opposition, Project Matterhorn
was approved at the Cairo (Sextant) Conference. Chiang Kai-shek
agreed to build the advanced bases at Chengtu. The British, who
would have to build the bases in the Calcutta area, went along. But
this did not end the argument. As late as February 15, 1944, the Joint
War Plans Committee still believed the best use of the B—29s before
deployment in the Marianas would be from Australian bases against
shipping and oil. In that committee’s opinion, Chengtu, China, was a
very poor choice. Nonetheless, Matterhorn was approved at Sextant
and proceeded as planned.

147

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 169 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Allied leaders also agreed at the Cairo (Sextant) Conference upon
two coordinated but semi-independent surface thrusts in the Pacific.
One would be from the Southwest Pacific, under the command of
Gen. Douglas MacArthur. The other would be across the Central
Pacific, under the command of Adm. Chester W. Nimitz.

Conference in the Pacific Theaters

At the termination of the Sextant Conference at Cairo in
December 1943, I was chosen to go with General Marshall to meet
with our principal commanders in the theaters in the Pacific. Our
flight plan took us to Karachi, India, then to Ceylon, and to Exmouth
Gulf and Darwin in Australia.

Lt. Gen. George C. Kenney, General MacArthur’s air
commander, met us at Darwin. We next flew across the Arafura Sea to
Port Moresby in New Guinea. The following day, General Marshall
met with MacArthur at the latter’s headquarters on Goodenough
Island. Only four persons were present at the meeting: Marshall,
MacArthur, Kenney, and myself. As a staff officer to Brig. Gen.
Frank M. Andrews in the early days of GHQ Air Force, Kenney had
made a major contribution toward creation of air power. He hit it off
from the first with General MacArthur—and little wonder. He did
things with air forces that left airmen gasping. MacArthur owed much
of his brilliant success in the Southwest Pacific to General Kenney’s
imaginative performance.

It was Kenney’s idea to establish advanced air bases, bypass
enemy strongholds, furnish air support for forward movements,
cooperate with the Navy in cutting off sea movements by isolated
Japanese garrisons, and even to supplement important supply move-
ments by air. He proposed to General MacArthur that, instead of
inching slowly over the formidable Owen Stanley mountains in New
Guinea, an airborne force be dropped and landed on the other side
behind Japanese strongholds, and supplied initially by air. This would
leave a Japanese force behind the invading force, cut off by the jungle,
the terrain, and the sea. When one of General MacArthur’s staff
officers asked sarcastically what the troops were supposed to do

148

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 170 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

without wheeled vehicles, Kenney said he would move these too. He
proceeded to cut trucks and other vehicles in two with acetylene
torches, stuff the parts into air transports, fly them over the
mountains, and have them assembled and welded back together. It
worked! He also promoted low-level skip bombing on ships, armed
medium bombers with multiple batteries of .50-caliber guns for
strafing, and sponsored the mounting of a 75-millimeter cannon on a
light bomber.

No air strategist or tactician showed greater imagination and
inventiveness than George Kenney. And it speaks volumes for mutual
trust and confidence that General MacArthur embraced the daring
proposals of his chief airman and pursued his audacious program of
“fsland hopping.”

The meeting place was a shack that had been fitted up as a private
war room for General MacArthur. Maps and charts covered the walls.
MacArthur described the situation and his plans. He stood at various
maps, strode back and forth, and talked for about two hours without
notes of any sort. He had at his fingertips all the dispositions and
recent actions of his troops. He seemed equally well acquainted with
his enemy. He named Japanese organizations and their commanders
everywhere and seemed well informed of their competence.
MacArthur revealed his plans, culminating in the recapture of the
Philippines and preparations for the next campaign, whether it be
Formosa or the coast of China. In minute detail he defined the force
requirements (land, sea, and air), the timing, the objectives, and the
logistic flow. Throughout the presentation he employed wit and charm
with devastating persuasiveness. Although I had from the first been an
advocate of a “Europe first” strategy, with attendant delay against
Japan, I simply melted under the persuasive logic and the delightful
charm of the great MacArthur. By the time he had finished, I was
anxious to find some way to give him what he had asked for.

General Marshall was of far sterner stuff, though his position left
him reason for sensitivity or even embarrassment. In their relationship
years before, General MacArthur had been Chief of Staff of the U.S.
Army when Marshall was still a colonel. In World War I, MacArthur
had been a general officer who had achieved an aura of fame from

149

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 171 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

personal bravery on the battlefield, while Marshall was an able but
little-known officer on General Pershing’s staff. Now the tables were
completely turned. General MacArthur, for all his great prestige, was
really a supplicant for approval of the strategy which he had proposed
with such élan. Those plans would have required the assignment to
General MacArthur not only of the majority of the American forces
arrayed against Japan, but also substantial diversion of forces destined
for Europe.

This was seven months before the launching of the Normandy
invasion. General Marshall had to tell MacArthur he could not have
these forces and hence could not carry out the program he had
described. This Marshall proceeded quietly to do. He reminded him
that the basic grand strategy of defeating Hitler first, and of
concentrating maximum forces to that purpose, was agreed upon and
approved by the Combined Chiefs of Staff as well as by President
Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill. Marshall stated quite calmly
his own devotion to that scheme, of which in fact he had been one of
the chief architects.

The meeting closed on the same level of punctilious courtesy on
which it had commenced. If General MacArthur was chagrined and
disappointed, he did not show it. We left for home via Hawaii where
General Marshall met with Admiral Nimitz and his staff. There was a
presentation of a plan for Central Pacific strategy that quite naturally
advocated primary reliance on the U.S. Navy for progress toward
Japan and for regaining base areas. General Marshall made no
commitments that I know of, and we journeyed home.

Pacific Strategy

After our return from the Sextant Conference at Cairo, arguments
on Pacific strategy rose. The next major strategic objective was
depicted by General Marshall as the “Formosa-China Coast-Luzon”
triangle, to be approached by General MacArthur from the Southwest
Pacific and Admiral Nimitz from the Central Pacific. Proponents of
the two thrusts presented their views to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, each

150

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 172 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

proposing that the preponderance of effort and of forces be assigned to
his axis.

On March 7, 1944, Admiral Nimitz, supported by his Deputy,
Rear Adm. Forrest P. Sherman, appeared before the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. They suggested bypassing the Japanese base at Truk and seizing
the southern Marianas. From there they would capture Ulithi Atoll
(about 360 miles southwest of Guam) for use as a fleet base, together
with nearby Yap where airfields could be constructed to support
Pacific naval operations. Nimitz’s schedule called for capture of the
Marianas in mid-June, Ulithi-Yap by September 1, and the Palau
Islands by November 1. It would then be possible to invade the
Formosa-China Coast-Luzon area by early spring 1945. He later
amended the plan to specify the capture of Palau before Ulithi-Yap.

On the same day, Lt. Gen. Richard K. Sutherland, General
MacArthur’s Chief of Staff, tendered a plan for major support of an
operation (Reno IV). This operation would be a push along the
northern coast of New Guinea into Mindanao, Philippine Islands. In a
covering letter, General MacArthur said: “The line of action presented
in RENO IV will sever sea communications between Japan and the
vital Borneo-Netherlands East Indies-Malaya region and will place
our forces in the Luzon-Formosa-China Coast area at the earliest
possible date under conditions that can be foreseen at this time.”

Neither of these plans and presentations attached any importance
to a strategic air offensive against Japan proper. When these propo-
nents of rival strategies had reached the end of their presentations
before the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Arnold remarked that the
Army Air Forces would like to present its views on Pacific strategy at
the next meeting. As he was leaving the room, he turned to me and
told me to prepare the presentation. I conferred with Generals Santy
Fairchild and Larry Kuter and prepared an outline.

I went up to General Arnold’s office to seek his approval or
instructions and learned he had gone to the West Coast and would not
be back for the next Chiefs meeting. Later I came to understand and
appreciate this tactic, which General Arnold used several times. His
position as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was equivocal at best.
The AAF was never accepted as an equal partner by the Navy. The

151

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 173 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Navy Department did not openly try to quash the upstart air
membership, but it worked quietly on the premise that there were by
law just two recognized military departments—the War Department
and the Navy Department. General Marshall was a tower of strength
in supporting General Arnold and the Army Air Forces. Still, Arnold
was a subordinate Army officer and he could never afford to openly
oppose Marshall. The Army Chief of Staff was universally fair and
unbiased, but the Army people as a whole tended to support
MacArthur just as Navy people tended to back Nimitz.

General Arnold knew that we airmen would lean toward Nimitz’s
position and the Navy, if we could be assured of the capture of the
Mariana Islands as base areas for B-29 strikes against Japan. If in
Arnold’s absence from the next meeting, General Marshall should
disagree with this approach, the AAF Chief on his return could
dismiss us in good grace on the ground that we had not been
instructed to take this line and had exceeded our authority. The status
of the Army Air Forces and the support of Marshall could thus be
preserved.

But in fact General Marshall did not take exception to the air
position as I presented it on March 9, 1944. The presentation was
favorably received. Subsequently, the Joint Plans Committee and the
Joint Logistics Committee proposed this schedule:

Objective Command Date

Hollandia Southwest Pacific April 15, 1944
Marianas Central Pacific June 15, 1944
Palau Islands Central Pacific September 15, 1944
Mindanao Southwest Pacific November 15, 1944
Formosa Central Pacific February 15, 1945

The question of Pacific strategy had not been clearly resolved, and
both the rival strategies were endorsed. Achieved, however, were the
capture of the Marianas as air bases and support for the B-29
operations in their air offensive against the Japanese home islands.
This precipitated the vital question of how the B-29 force would be
organized, commanded, and controlled.

152

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 174 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

Roles and Missions for Strategic Air Forces

The command of strategic air forces was thornier than the
technical problems posed by the new bomber airplane. Unity of
command was a cherished military concept in both the Army and the
Navy. The Army attained this unity by designating a single
commander with authority over all units within specific geographical
boundaries. The Navy achieved it by retaining control of major
combat naval forces under the ultimate command of the top naval
echelon of the nation. Fleet units were rarely assigned to territorial
command areas. When they were, it was always with the proviso they
could be withdrawn at any moment for use elsewhere if the naval
situation should so require.

Strategic air forces did not fit either concept, but their command
characteristics resembled more closely those of the Navy than those of
the Army. Often the long-range air force straddled several land
commands. Its bombers might be based in many areas, each under
separate Army or Navy jurisdiction. But bombers of the strategic air
forces demanded unity at the target area, and they needed continuity
of application if they were to accomplish their strategic mission. The
very flexibility that was the cardinal virtue of strategic bombers was
also their greatest vulnerability. There was a constant temptation to
divert them from their long-range strategic war objectives to targets
critical only to local area commanders.

The problem of unity of command grew more acute as primary
attention turned to Japan and the B~29 force started to emerge. To
apply this very heavy bomber force against Japan proper—its most
important and potentially decisive role—plans were made to set up a
number of bases within action radius of Japan. These bases were to be
in China, the Marianas, Alaska, the Philippines, and Formosa or
Okinawa.

Project Matterhorn called for bases in India and China. All U.S.
forces there were under Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell, USA. He in turn was
part of the Allied Southeast Asia Command headed by Adm. Lord
Louis Mountbatten of the Royal Navy. (This command had been
created at the August 1943 Quebec (Quadrant) Conference.) Although

153

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 175 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Admiral Mountbatten was Supreme Allied commander, Southeast
Asia, Chiang Kai-shek did not recognize any commander in China
above himself. General Stilwell commanded all U.S. forces in the
China-Burma-India Theater, which would include the B—29 forces.
General Chennault commanded the U.S. Fourteenth Air Force and
was at the same time Chiang Kai-shek’s Chief of Staff for Air.
Admiral Mountbatten had an Allied Air Commander in Chief,
Southeast Asia Command, Air Chief Marshal Richard E. C. Peirse.
Maj. Gen. George E. Stratemeyer was Commanding General, U.S.
Army Air Forces in the India-Burma Sector, and Air Advisor to
General Stilwell in China. Stratemeyer’s command included the Tenth
Air Force based in India. To further confuse an already complicated
command arrangement, Stilwell gave Stratemeyer administrative
command of the B-29 force (with its main bases in India) and also
issued orders to the Fourteenth Air Force through him. General
Stilwell proposed to exercise direct control of the B-29s, which he
planned to use extensively in combined operations in China against
Japanese ground troops. Admiral Mountbatten endorsed the initial
operations entailed in Matterhorn, but planned to use the B—29s later
in support of Southeast Asia Command objectives. In his capacity as
Chiang Kai-shek’s Chief of Staff for Air, General Chennault appealed
to President Roosevelt directly requesting that all B-29s operating out
of China be placed under his control. He made a similar request to
General Arnold, asking that the B—29s operating from Chinese bases
be put under the U.S. Fourteenth Air Force.

The Joint Staff planners proposed that ultimately four groups of
B-29s be based in the Philippines. Those islands, when recaptured,
would be under the command of General MacArthur. His chief
airman, General Kenney, was already making vigorous demands for
B-29s to be used in the Southwest Pacific campaign. Kenney wanted
B-29s stationed in Darwin, Australia, for strikes on targets in the
Netherlands East Indies. In addition, plans were actively being
prepared for positioning B-29s in the Central Pacific and in Alaska.
The Marianas, due to be captured chiefly as the Central Pacific base
for the B-29s, would under existing circumstances be under the
command of Admiral Nimitz. Alaska was still another command area.

154

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 176 ---
Puewwoy seaquiog 4ixx—sS6Z-g 40 WOddNS joOdeq 410; a\qisuodsay ..,,
seuelew—s6Gz-g JO 340ddng }0deg 10; ajqisuodsey ,,
seseq G7-Q JO BSUajJaG JI 104 ajqisuodsoy ,

dv Yue, dV Ylueeunoy

+4ospineg «2/NeuusyD
uopue} a100-W
Puewwosg
4) 6
sounseyy nA oa Buonsuy 4eModg selAeq |jeUU0g,0 puewwo apy 48380UL
‘ A 4 use3seQ 9D eipus
1-2. oo o 2 e}0deq ce pie ele eL ag sBuimy + eABABWOIENS duy 99
i a :
AV Yluaress [ Seer
aly puemso4 e18H
Jsepuewwos | (0a) puewwon seqwog - 9a xx VaS Jepuewwoy
49A00H vod xx Aew 27 ANY PSV
jesdeyy asslad
vo AVV
id dv |

(WaS) Puewwod
eis JseayzNoS

JOPUBIWOD ~—joyeayy Ul

soisiBo7
403 D9
Ayndeg

-sao104 dy
‘ ylenuam 4,
Away 99 uowepy

d ,
(WOd) eay uBE9Q d119eq AV yenueML ely o119eq ysemMu NOS PONY ccaunoy seos04 SN
ONID 99 ONIOD HEGLUNOW saAQuepam

(AVV 9D) Plowy anyiyoew | |

ZUIWIN
T HEIS 40 SLEIUD weysiey
HBS JO SYBI4YD PeUlqUioD ysiiig BuelYD

H481S 40 SJBIYD 1UIOF SH
Gy6L Asenuer
JOYOd YIV HLSILNSML
SdIHSNOILV14Y LHOddNS GNV “IOYULNOD ‘GNVWWOO

155

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 177 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Every one of these base areas was under a separate theater
commander, and these field commanders were powerful people. Each
wanted to apply the B—29s to his own strategic theater purposes, and
each resented any incursion into his area of control. Yet there was one
area in which unity of air command and continuity of effort was
imperative. That was the target area itself, Japan, which was under the
control of none of them.

In March 1944 I presented to the Joint Chiefs of Staff the Army
Air Forces concept of Pacific strategy. It envisioned a concerted
bombing offensive against the Japanese home islands from the
Marianas, to undermine the war-making capability of Japan. The plan
also provided for the main B-29 force to be located in the Marianas.
When the Philippines had been retaken, B—29 units were likewise to be
situated on bases there within range of Japan. The B-29s in Chengtu,
China, were to be moved forward when better base areas became
available. A base was to be built in the Aleutian Islands as well.

Prior to the redeployment of the Eighth Air Force, the first plan
for the final deployment of B—29s (and escort fighters when they
became available) was as follows:

Chengtu, China 4 B-29 groups*

Mariana Islands 16 B-29 groups (3 squadrons each)

Ryukyu Islands 12 B—29 groups (3 squadrons each)

Philippine Islands 12 B-29 groups (3 squadrons each)

Aleutian Islands 4 B-29 groups (deployment
questionable)

Iwo Jima Island 3 groups of long-range support

fighters (type unspecified)

Ie Shima Island 2 groups of support fighters
(type unspecified)

Kikai Island 2 groups of support fighters
(type unspecified)

Okinawa Island 1 squadron of strategic
reconnaissance aircraft
(type unspecified)

*These groups, making up the 58th Bombardment Wing of the XX Bomber Command,
were later transferred to the Marianas.

156

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 178 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

The main thrust of the plan was a unified and concerted air
bombardment concentrated on a single list of targets in the Japanese
home islands and coordinated through a unified air command.

Twentieth Air Force

Various schemes for centralizing control of the B—29s under the
Joint Chiefs of Staff had been discussed ever since Sextant. Actually it
was the similarity of this air problem to the traditional naval problem
which finally was persuasive. At least, it was this resemblance which
persuaded Adm. Ernest J. King to accept the idea of a strategic air
force that would be assigned to none of the surface commands, but
would report directly to the Joint Chiefs.

In retrospect, the way this significant agreement was reached
seems almost trivial. I secured General Arnold’s permission to discuss
the subject with Admiral King. I found King and Arnold walking
together down a corridor leading to the Joint Chiefs of Staff
conference room. I asked Admiral! King if I might have a word with
him. I described briefly the problem of concerted command and
control of the long-range bombers that would be attacking common
targets in Japan, but would be operating from bases under the
command of several separate theater commanders. I suggested a
similarity with the problems attendant on control of the U.S. Fleet
whose command was centralized under him as Commander in Chief,
U.S. Fleet, as well as the Navy member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The U.S. fleets in the Pacific could be employed in concerted action
against the Japanese naval forces under unified command, wherever
the battle area might be and regardless of the geographical areas in
which naval bases might lie. The B~29s had a like requirement. Would
it not be sensible to concentrate the very long-range bombers arrayed
against Japan in a strategic air force under General Arnold, Com-
manding General of the Army Air Forces? Unified operations against
targets in Japan could be assured, notwithstanding the geographical
areas in which the B—29 bases might be located. Under this

157

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 179 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

arrangement, the B—29s would in fact fall under the control of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, with General Arnold serving not only as
Commanding General, but as executive agent for the Joint Chiefs. The
Joint Chiefs would furnish unified strategic air objectives. As in the
case of logistic support for fleet units of the Navy, such support could
be provided the B-29s through directive to appropriate area and
theater commanders. Admiral King reflected for a moment and said,
“I could find such an arrangement acceptable.”

I prepared a brief memorandum to that effect, discussed it with
Generals Kuter and Fairchild, and took it over to the War Depart-
ment Operations Division. The struggle was only half won because
General Marshall was dedicated to the concept of theater unity of
command. He had even forced through the first Allied unified
command, the ill-fated organization under British Gen. Archibald P.
Wavell. This command embraced all the forces in a specified area, and
was formally called the Australian-British-Dutch-American Com-
mand. Set up in January 1942 at General Marshall’s insistence, it
operated until the fall of the Netherlands East Indies to the Japanese
in February. I gave the paper to Maj. Gen. Thomas T. Handy,
Marshall’s Deputy for Plans and Operations. Tom Handy was one of
the finest and most able officers with whom I have been associated. He
had General Marshall’s great integrity and intellectual grasp, coupled
with a fine sense of humor. He accepted the paper, read it carefully,
and looked at me. “T’ll tell you the truth, Hansell,” he said, “I don’t
like any part of this paper. It violates the principle of unity of
command in a theater of war. It inserts operational forces into a
commander’s area of responsibility but gives him no control of those
forces. At the same time, the theater commander is expected to defend
and supply and support those forces in competition with his own
requirements. I don’t like it.” Then he grinned and said, “But I don’t
have a better solution. I’ll buy it.” I said, “Do you think General
Marshall will buy it?” He replied, “General Marshall isn’t here. But I
know how he’ll react. If General Arnold and Admiral King are agreed
on it, he’ll go along. As a matter of fact, I’ll approve it in his name.”
That memorandum served as the basis for a paper presented to the

158

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 180 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

Joint Chiefs of Staff by the Joint Plans Committee, of which I was the
air member.

The Twentieth Air Force was born on April 4, 1944, with General
Arnold its first commander. It was designated the Twentieth to
distinguish it from the other numbered air forces. On April 10 the
Joint Chiefs of Staff accepted the Joint Plans Committee paper, and it
constituted the formal charter under which the Twentieth operated. I
have always believed the wartime establishment of the Twentieth Air
Force was one of the most important events in United States Air Force
history. If it had not occurred, we might be still parceling out our big
punch in penny packets to numerous theaters and lower commands.
And there might have been no United States Air Force.

The Joint Chiefs, in approving the creation of the Twentieth Air
Force, directed:

Commanders of the Theaters in which the Twentieth Air
Force’s XXth and XXIst Bomber Commands are based are directed
to coordinate B-29 operations with other air operations in their
Theaters, to construct and defend B-29 bases, and to provide
logistical support and common administrative control of the B-29
forces. Should strategic or tactical emergencies arise requiring the
use of the B-29 forces for purposes other than the missions assigned
to them by the Joint Chiefs, Theater commanders are authorized to
use the B-29 forces, immediately informing the Joint Chiefs of such
action.

Admiral King’s endorsement was vital because the bulk of the
bombers would be in the Pacific Ocean Area, a naval command.
General Marshall, with his typical breadth of vision, gave full support
to the project.

The British Chiefs of Staff Committee plans called for participa-
tion of British bombers in the final air offensive against Japan. Also,
the change in command relations would affect the Supreme Allied
Commander, Southeast Asia, who operated under the Combined
Chiefs of Staff with the British Chiefs of Staff Committee as executive
agents.

The British Chiefs countered with the proposal that the air

159

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 181 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

offensive, including the Twentieth Air Force and later a British
bomber contingent, be placed under the control of the Combined
Chiefs of Staff rather than the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff. This would
parallel the command relationship in the European Combined Bomber
Offensive in which Air Chief Marshal Portal had been the executive
agent of the Combined Chiefs. The Joint Chiefs demurred: The CBO
in Europe was a British-American venture, while the air offensive
against Japan was almost completely an American one. The British
did not press the issue.

When General Arnold assumed command of the Twentieth Air
Force and I became its first Chief of Staff, it was apparent we needed a
staff for the new organization. But Arnold already had a staff—a large
one—the Air Staff, or Headquarters Army Air Forces. He was loath
to increase the “overhead” by creating yet another staff. I suggested to
General Arnold that the Air Staff meet the needs of the Twentieth Air
Force. He agreed somewhat reluctantly. The Air Staff was part of
AAF Headquarters, the parent for all the numbered air forces. To
single out the Twentieth as the special concern of the Air Staff—as an
operational headquarters for a combat air command—would seem to
slight all the others. But General Arnold did not want another
headquarters staff in Washington, so he went along with my sugges-
tion. Each of the Assistant Chiefs of Air Staff (Personnel; Intelligence;
Training, Materiel, Maintenance, and Distribution; Operations, Com-
mitments, and Requirements; and Plans) was told to wear two hats:
one for Headquarters AAF and the other for Headquarters Twentieth
Air Force. Each of these Assistant Chiefs selected one senior officer to
represent him on Twentieth Air Force matters. General Order No. 1,
Twentieth Air Force, assigned Col. Cecil E. Combs to the A-3
Division of the Twentieth as Chief of Combat Operations. I was
designated a Deputy Chief of Air Staff as well as Chief of Staff of the
Twentieth. On the whole, I thought the scheme worked reasonably
well.

In many ways the Twentieth had unique features and problems.
There was the need to draw up and approve tables of organization and
equipment and to establish tactical doctrine and standing operating
procedures. This would (1) permit the handling, control, and coordi-

160

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 182 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

nation of many aircraft and units, and (2) provide a basis for uniform
training.

Air Staff members who served as principal staff officers for the
Twentieth Air Force while I was the Twentieth’s Chief of Staff and
Deputy Chief of Air Staff included:

Brig Gen. John H. McCormick A~1 (Personnel)

Col. Woodbury M. Burgess A-2 (Intelligence)

Col. Cecil E. Combs A-3 (Combat Operations)

Col. William F. McKee A-3 (Operations, Commitments,
and Requirements)

Col. Llewellyn O. Ryan A-3 (Training)

Lt. Col. John W. Carpenter A-3 (Crew Training)

Col. Samuel R. Brentnall A-4 (Materiel, Maintenance,
and Distribution)

Col. Sol Rosenblatt A-4 (Supply)

Maj. Gen. Laurence S. Kuter A-5 (Plans)

Maj. Gen. David N. W. Grant Surgeon

Brig. Gen. Harold M. McClelland Communications Officer

Col. Max F. Schneider Air Inspector

Col. Guido R. Perera Target Intelligence Officer
and representative of
the Committee of Opera-
tions Analysts

Arrangements had to be made for deployment to overseas bases
and for logistic support. Personnel needed to be selected for key
assignments. The top ones, of course, required General Arnold’s
approval, and he selected commanders at his own discretion. I
anxiously watched the Materiel Command’s progress in correcting a
multitude of airplane and engine technical problems. I spent as much
time as I could shepherding concepts and ideas through the Joint War
Plans Committee, the Joint Plans Committee, and the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and discouraging dismemberment of the force. At my request,
the Committee of Operations Analysts was rendered responsive to the
Chief of Staff of the Twentieth Air Force on matters relating to that
command. I had to be ready at a moment’s notice to answer General
Arnold’s questions, so he could be prepared to field those of the other

161

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 183 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who were showing a lively
interest in the new Twentieth Air Force.

One of the first challenges facing the Twentieth was communica-
tions—both command-and-control and administrative. The Joint
Chiefs had approved our request to set up our own separate
communications system. This was a sizable order seeing that we would
have units and headquarters scattered over half the world. I briefed
General Arnold on our communications requirements and watched
with amusement as he applied his famous technique for attacking the
impossible. He called in Brig. Gen. Harold M. McClelland, head of
communications for the Army Air Forces. General Arnold said with
caustic emphasis that he wanted:

A net that would include Washington, Hawaii, the Marianas (which
had not yet been captured), Calcutta, India, and Chengtu, China,
with provision for extension to somewhere in the Philippines (when
they were captured). He wanted TOP SECRET security with
instantaneous coding and read-out by teleprinters. He wanted the
net in operation twenty-four hours a day.

Fantastic, I thought! It couldn’t be done. General McClelland didn’t
bat an eye. He said “Yes, sir,” saluted and departed. It left Arnold a
little flat and completely deflated me.

General McClelland had the last chuckle. He produced. Shortly
after I had set up headquarters in Guam, (about six months after this
conversation) the machinery was working. Within six weeks, I was
sick of it. The machine worked twenty-four hours a day all right,
without stopping. Most of the messages seemed to consist of questions
I could not answer. I began to understand the meaning of the remark
ascribed to the English statesman, Lord Palmerston, that the disinte-
gration of the British Empire had begun with the invention of the
telegraph.

During one of our daily staff meetings at Headquarters Twentieth
Air Force, I got rather upset because supplies were not being provided
for at a rate I thought satisfactory. The staff representative for
materiel was Sol Rosenblatt, a temporary wartime colonel. I delivered
myself of a somewhat intemperate diatribe. I mentioned that the U.S.

162

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 184 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

Navy always got the best of everything, with plenty to spare, while
good fighting people in the Army—and the Army Air Forces in
particular—made do on a song and a shoestring. The Twentieth Air
Force was on its way to becoming the most powerful fighting force in
the world, and it deserved the best and we were going to provide it.

I felt that I had expressed myself well and that the point was
clearly understood—and I dismissed the subject from my mind for a
while. But intemperance often breeds surprising results. It did so in
this case. It was some time before I found out what a fire I had started.
Colonel Rosenblatt took me seriously. He used not only my meager
name and authority to churn the brew, but he used General Arnold’s
name and authority as well. I do not suppose we will ever find out the
true level of supplies that were ordered for the Twentieth. I think it
likely supplies were still being shipped to the Marianas long after the
war was over and the troops had come home. Through his efforts I
also acquired for a brief time my own personal “fleet” of cargo vessels.
But that is another story.

During the period I served as Chief of Staff of the Twentieth Air
Force, I had one particular experience which I well remember. The
B-29s were coming off the production line, and there was increasing
interest and speculation in the aviation press. We tried to keep a tight
rein on security. The B-29s were destined for the major air assault on
Japan. They would be operating at high altitude, unescorted. If the
Japanese learned this and also discovered the salient elements of B-29
performance and defensive firepower, they would try by every means
at their disposal to provide defenses against them. Security could be
directly equated in terms of mission success or failure and in terms of
the lives of American crewmen. We were deeply worried about news
leaks. Of course there was wartime censorship, but skilled aviation
writers who indulged in speculation could, and often did, hit upon the
truth.

We had an exceptionally fine public relations officer in Twentieth
Air Force Headquarters. His name was Rex Smith, and he was a
wartime colonel in the Army Air Forces. He was a veteran newsman
and had been at one time a foreign editor of Newsweek magazine. He
came to me with a suggestion and recommendation. He said:

163

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 185 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

I know my people and my associates. They are as loyal and patriotic
as any Americans you can find anywhere. They will respond to a
gesture of faith, if they understand the issues and if they are treated
fairly and equitably. I suggest we have a general meeting of all the
professional aviation writers, tell them the truth, put them on their
honor not to divulge, and assure them that, when the news can be
released, they will all be told so at exactly the same time so that
there will be no “scoops.” Let them write their stories and file them
with us. We will release them simultaneously at the earliest time
that will not jeopardize our mission.

I was somewhat shaken by this bold suggestion. But I had a lot of faith
in Rex Smith, and I realized I knew practically nothing about the
press and news media. I bought the idea and then obtained General
Arnold’s agreement.

We had the meeting in a midwestern city. There were several
hundred people present. The security arrangements were carefully
prepared and carried out. We “spilled the beans” to a degree that left
me quaking. But it worked like a charm. Reporters and writers filed
their stories. When the first bombs released over Tokyo were still in
the air, a message was flashed back to Guam and was automatically
relayed to Washington. The President was the first recipient. But
almost simultaneously, all the stories and reports Rex Smith had been
holding were released to the press and the other news media. Whether
this approach would work again, I do not know. But it worked once to
perfection and every attendee at the conference proved completely
trustworthy.

Original plans called for the Twentieth Air Force to eventually
have three or four bomber commands: the XX Bomber Command in
China-India; the XXI in the Marianas; the XXII in the Philippines or
Formosa or Okinawa; and perhaps the XXIII in Alaska. The
Twentieth’s total aircraft would be 1,000 to 1,500 operational B—29s
and such escort fighters as could be developed or modified.

The decision to concentrate the B-29s under Joint Chiefs of Staff
control made possible the development of the concerted bomber
offensive against Japan. However, it did not mark the close of the
argument from the theater field commanders. They continued their

164

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 186 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

efforts to gain control of the B-29 units in their areas. Requests from
General MacArthur’s headquarters were especially insistent. They
were coupled with personal letters from General Kenney to General
Arnold contending that B-29 operations out of the Marianas against
the Japanese home islands were militarily and technically unfeasible.

The XX Bomber Command

The initial operations of the XX Bomber Command in India and
China did not go well. Logistic problems had been expected, but the
operational tactics were not yielding results even when the B-29s had
sufficient gas and bombs to attack their targets. Brig. Gen. Kenneth B.
Wolfe was using night operations exclusively. The coke oven targets
(prescribed as first priority) did not present good radar images and
were not easily seen at night. In consequence, the bombs were not
being placed on their targets. As Chief of Staff of the Twentieth Air
Force, I prodded General Wolfe to improve bombing results. I
requested daylight bombing of the coke ovens in the Mukden area in
Manchuria, where Japanese fighter defenses were not very effective.
The available B—29 force was deemed by some to be too small to
penetrate the air defenses of the Japanese islands themselves. Others of
us believed it could be done. As a matter of fact, the XXI did pierce
the air defenses of Tokyo in raids from the Marianas later in the year,
with only one wing of B~29s—the same strength available to the XX.
General Wolfe vigorously denied that his B—29s could fly in forma-
tions in daylight to these targets. He also categorically said B-29s
could not reach their targets in daylight in formation from the
Marianas. This assessment dealt a real body blow to the operational
plans of the XXI. Wolfe was the only air commander having actual
experience with the airplane, and he was the real expert and final
authority on the technical aspects of the B-—29 itself.

I directed Colonel Combs, Chief of Combat Operations for the
Twentieth, to conduct practice tests to confirm or refute this
contention that the B-29 had insufficient range to operate in
formation as required. He went to Eglin Field, Florida, and set up a
test run over the Gulf of Mexico simulating the flight from the

165

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 187 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Marianas to Tokyo and back. Simulated bombloads of 8,000 pounds
were carried as well as full loads of ammunition. Combs could muster
but 3 B-29s for the test, but it was run with wartime combat tactics
imitated as closely as possible, including the nature of the formation
itself. That is to say, the test entailed initial assembly, loose formation
en route, climb to 30,000 feet for the bomb run, tight defensive
formation in the areas of potential fighter interception, and retention
of that formation until beyond the range of enemy fighters, then return
to base in loose formation.

The aircraft all returned successfully to the original base, Eglin
Field, but gasoline reserves were admittedly too low. Though the
operation was feasible, much remained to be learned about fuel
consumption and daylight tactics if large formations were to be flown
over those distances. Upon receiving the report of the test, General
Wolfe still did not move from the stand he had taken. The B-29 was a
magnificent engineering achievement, but it was new and different and
it had new engines that we did not fully understand.

The XXI Bomber Command

The Twentieth Air Force was under extreme pressure to perform.
One major slip and the critics would have their way—the Twentieth
would have been dismembered and parceled out to the various
theaters. An understanding of this tension and pressure is vital to an
understanding of the XXI Bomber Command’s early struggle to meet
its commitments. We had pledged to launch an air offensive against
Japan in November 1944. This proposed assault was tied into the
carefully prepared plans for the Pacific campaigns of Admiral Nimitz
and General MacArthur. The target date had to be met and the
success of a highly controversial operation had to be shown, if
Strategic air power was to reach fruition in the Pacific.

The XXI Bomber Command was activated at Smoky Hill Army
Air Field, Salina, Kansas, on March 1, 1944. At that time, the XX
Bomber Command was stationed at Kharagpur, India, in the China-
Burma-India Theater. The 73d Bombardment Wing, originally sched-
uled for the XX Bomber Command, had been transferred to the XXI

166

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 188 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

when the XX was reduced from two wings (eight groups) to one wing,
the 58th. The XXI Bomber Command was trained and staffed by the
Second Air Force. Headquarters of the XXI was later moved from
Salina, Kansas, to Peterson Field, Colorado Springs, Colorado. The
XXI was to consist of 1,000 B—29s and it had to be given the necessary
training.

In late spring 1944, General Arnold told me I was to have
command of the XXI Bomber Command destined for the Marianas.
My replacement as Chief of Staff of the Twentieth Air Force was Brig.
Gen. Lauris “Larry” Norstad. His arrival was delayed because he felt
he should “visit the troops” before becoming Chief of Staff, and he
insisted on going to the India-China Theater. This took time so I could
not get away until August to get a look at training and organize
Headquarters XXI Bomber Command. When I finally assumed
command of the XXI on August 28, 1944, the units of the 73d Wing
were training for night radar bombing, along the pattern of the XX
Bomber Command, of which it was to have been a part.

Due to its location, logistic troubles, and relationship to the chief
target areas, the XX had been given target priorities different than
those of the XXI. The force was thought to be too small to fight its
way through the defenses of the Japanese homeland in daylight. And it
could reach solely the southern portion of Japan from bases around
Chengtu, China. The coke oven targets had proved unsuitable for
night radar bombing. Other targets needed to be suited to radar
bombing or situated in lightly defended areas. Aside from the coke
ovens, this left little of real importance as targets for the XX.

The advice of the Committee of Operations Analysts was sought
on the strategic targets of the Twentieth Air Force regardless of basing
locations. The committee recommended using the B-29s against
merchant shipping, steel production (through coke ovens), urban
industrial areas, aircraft plants, the antifriction bearing industry, the
electronics industry, and belatedly the petroleum industry. The
committee repeated its conviction that the coke oven plants in
Manchuria were highly vulnerable to bombing and were vital to
Japanese steel production. It further pointed out the extreme vulnera-
bility of Japanese urban areas to incendiary attack.

167

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 189 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Memory of the Luftwaffe still fresh in its mind, the Air Staff
advocated destruction or neutralization of the Japanese Air Force as
an overriding priority for the XXI Bomber Command. The Joint
Chiefs of Staff agreed. The aircraft and engine plants assigned as top
priority targets to the XXI (based in the Marianas) were precision
targets. Thirteen aircraft and engine plants were known to exist in
Japan. It was estimated that eight of them turned out seventy percent
of Japanese aircraft engines. The towns hosting these factories were
known. Even so, the actual plants had not been pinpointed—a major
task for the reconnaissance squadron of the XXI.

We had some general knowledge of the industry. Right after
World War I, the Japanese had canvassed European and American
aircraft and engine builders and had obtained production licenses.
Three major Japanese producers emerged at that time: Nakajima,
Mitsubishi, and Kawasaki. They had continued to dominate the
Japanese airframe, engine, and propeller business. As the U.S.
Strategic Bombing Survey later reported:

While waves of Japanese technicians were studying American
factories, America’s top engineering schools were training men who,
on their return to Japan, were to design the Zero fighter, Betty
bomber, and other planes on which the Japanese bid for Pacific
domination was to be based.

By 1930, the Japanese Army and Navy had decided the
industry should stand on its own feet, and established a policy of
self-sufficiency, whereby only aircraft and engines of Japanese
designs were to be considered. No more foreign engineers were to be
hired. This was intended mainly as a sop to Japanese nationalistic
pride, however, and did not prevent their technical missions from
continuing to buy the best foreign models as starting points for
Japanese designs. In 1935 Nakajima purchased licenses on the early
Corsair from Chance Vought Corp., and it acquired designs of the
Whirlwind and Cyclone engines from Wright Aeronautical Corp. in
1937. Mitsubishi purchased a French radial engine, which became
the basis for their famous Kinsei series, and secured plans for a
Curtiss fighter in 1937. Sumitomo Metals bought rights to the
American Hamilton Standard and German VDM propellers. Ka-
wasaki secured rights on the German Daimler-Benz engine, from
which came the only Japanese liquid-cooled engine of the war... .

168

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 190 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

We knew that Japan had embarked upon a vast and hurried
expansion of her military aircraft industry. We knew, for example,
that the Japanese government had directed a near-doubling of the
aircraft plants in 1941. Japanese newspapers bragged to the world that
a great new airframe and assembly plant had been built at Musashino,
near Tokyo, and another close to Nagoya was heralded as the second
largest in the world. Kawasaki set up immense modern ones near
Nagoya. However, the precise location and description of these plants
was a mystery to us in the fall of 1944. We recognized that those
concentrated in the vicinity of Tokyo, Nagoya, and Kobe would be
extremely vital precision targets—if and when we discovered their
precise locations and descriptions.

The aircraft targets could not be found, hit, and destroyed with
the radar bombing equipment and the meager information we had. So
the units of the XXI Bomber Command required crash retraining to
do high-altitude, daylight precision bombing and to fly in formations
not yet selected. We had to plan on reconnaissance after we had
created a base on Saipan. The airplane and engine factory targets were
at the extreme limit of the B-29 radius of action as it was then
understood. Formations flying always reduces range, and it made
completion of our missions (marginal at best) even more of a problem.
In fact, it took several months of actual operation to master the
techniques of fuel control that would give the B-29 its design
capability.

There was spirited dispute at the time over this change in bombing
tactics. The dispute persists, but the reasoning is not hard to trace. Our
only real experience in massive bombing operations was over Europe.
Had we not learned a painful lesson there? In Europe the whole
concept of American air power—the selection of vital targets on the
ground and their destruction through precision bombing—had faced
the possibility of disastrous failure. The ability of massive bomber
formations to fight their way through enemy defenses and reach
remote targets, without intolerable losses, came dangerously close to
being disproved. If the German fighter forces had been left free to
expand, the price might have been too high. And if it had been, the air
offensive would have failed and with it any hope of surface invasion.

169

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 191 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

In Europe the bombers of the Eighth and Fifteenth Air Forces
were directed against the sources of German fighter development and
strength—aircraft and engine factories, air bases, and sources of
aviation fuel. These comprised the targets of the “intermediate
objective:”’ the enemy air force. As soon as possible, the penetration
capability of the bomber formations was supplemented by escort
fighters. This experience in Europe obviously weighed heavily in
establishing target systems in Japan. The aircraft and engine factories
and to a lesser degree the oil resources were designated the intermedi-
ate objective in the war against Japan. They were to receive first
priority in point of time. Dangerous as unescorted daylight missions
might be, they had to be undertaken against Japanese aircraft and
engine plants lest the Japanese air force grow strong enough to make
our missions too costly to sustain.

The other lesson of European air combat could not be applied
initially to the Twentieth Air Force. The range of the B—29 prevented
escort fighters from accompanying the formations from the Marianas,
though steps were taken to secure a very-long-range escort fighter.
Until Iwo Jima could be captured and a fighter base set up there, the
bombers would be completely on their own. This was really the most
controversial point of all. Seasoned experts on every hand assured us
the B-29s would simply be shot out of the air. But it was a risk that
had to be taken if the strategic purposes were to be achieved. And the
B-29s had some factors working for them—greatly improved defen-
sive firepower and high-altitude performance.

Early in September 1944, I issued orders for converting the 73d
Bombardment Wing to daylight tactics, and I established tactical
doctrine for daylight operations including a standard formation.
Opposition to this change was severe, especially from the 73d Wing.
Training was intensive. But training missions from Kansas to Cuba,
simulating the mission from Saipan to Japan, left bombers down all
over the Gulf States. Meanwhile, the pressure to commit the command
to combat rose. Final practice missions were flown. Groups of the 73d
flew two long-range missions that stressed takeoff, assembly, rendez-
vous, formation flying, and simulated frontal weather penetration.
Still, it was simply impossible to train bombardiers to an acceptable

170

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 192 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

precision accuracy in the time remaining. Training would have to be
completed in the Pacific.

Capture of the Marianas as a base for B-29 operations stemmed
from the Army Air Forces’ initiative and insistence. However, the
decision was arrived at before the crews had enough flying experience
with the B-29 to know what its performance truly was. Early
experience in the training areas revealed that the round trip from the
Marianas to Tokyo was marginal for the B-29, even on paper and
without opposition. Depending on the location of the base and the
target, the distance could be as much as 1,550 miles one way. Clearly
there would be no land-based escort fighters for the first part of the
campaign, prior to the capture of Iwo Jima. Apart from the marginal
range of the B—29, nearly 1,500 miles of hostile water separated the
Marianas from Tokyo.

When the first units deployed to Saipan six weeks later, the crews
had averaged less than a hundred hours of total flying time in the
B-29. The average high-altitude formation flying experience was
under twelve hours. Moreover, the B-29’s engines developed a mean
tendency to swallow valves and catch fire. The magnesium crankcases
burned with a fury defying all extinguishing. Besides, gunsighting
blisters were either blowing out at high altitude or frosting up so badly
that the gunners could not see through them. But there was not time
to fix them properly.

The burning out of exhaust valves was finally solved by fitting a
goosenecked pipe that sprayed cool air directly on the valve housing,
and by putting cuffs on the props to pump more air through the engine
cowling. Oil flow through the exhaust valve housing was also
improved. The other problems—frosting of panes in the cockpit and of
plastic bubbles at gunners’ scanning stations—were solved by running
hot air hoses to the affected areas. With the cockpit blanked out, it
obviously would have been impossible to keep formation. And with
the scanning bubbles clouded, the gunners could not see to shoot.
These problems were solved at literally the eleventh hour.

I requested that the units of the XXI Bomber Command be flown
in squadron formation to Saipan under Air Transport Command
control. This would let them get needed experience flying in formation

171

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 193 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

over considerable distances. The request was denied on the ground
that the B—29 had not the range to fly in formation the 2,400 miles
from Sacramento to Hawaii. The flight would have been without a
bombload, in the face of no opposition, and with excellent communica-
tions, weather reporting, and base facilities. These same units, on
arrival in Saipan, were faced with a round trip of about 3,000 miles,
with bombloads, in the face of expected enemy opposition, and with no
weather data or communications.

Two bases, each with two 8500-foot paved runways and 80
hardstands, necessary shops, housing, fueling facilities, and other
essentials were supposed to be ready on Saipan. The bases were to have
been built by the Central Pacific Area Command, but stubborn
interference by the Japanese garrisons in the Pacific and competition
from U.S. Navy construction work had set the schedule back by
several months.

I paid a departing visit to General Arnold and General Marshall
in Washington in mid-September. In response to his inquiry, I assured
General Marshall we would carry out our pledge to attack Japan in
November. Departing on October 5, I took the first B-29 to the
Marianas and started the flow which ultimately grew massive. I flew
with the crew from the 73d Wing, the aircraft commander being a
bright and capable young major named Jack J. Catton. Catton and I
alternated in the pilot position; I took it from Sacramento to Hawaii;
he took it to Kwajalein; and I flew the last lap to Saipan. We took off
from Mather Field near Sacramento. The original design gross weight
of the B-29 was 120,000 pounds. Wright Field reluctantly permitted
an overload weight to 128,000 pounds. With our spare engine in the
bomb bay and the various kits we carried, we weighed in at about
130,000 pounds.

When we reached Hickam Field in Honolulu, Admiral Nimitz,
Commander in Chief, Pacific Ocean Area, greeted us as did Lt. Gen.
Millard F. “Miff’ Harmon, Deputy Commanding General for Admin-
istration and Logistics, Twentieth Air Force. General Arnold retained
direct control for operations as Commanding General of the Twenti-
eth as well as executive agent for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. I asked
Admiral Nimitz and General Harmon for an opportunity to discuss

172

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 194 ---
PLANNING THE WAR AGAINST JAPAN

my mission and my requirements. Meeting with Admiral Nimitz the
next morning, I explained my mission and its peculiar command
relationships. That is, I would be completely dependent on him for
construction of bases in the Marianas, for movement and delivery of
all supplies by surface transportation, and for defense of the bases. At
the same time, I would be independent of his authority in operational
matters, except for serious emergencies.

This command relationship had apparently not been clearly
spelled out or explained to Admiral Nimitz, because he expressed
surprise on some counts. I, for my part, was surprised too. General
Kuter had made a trip to Hawaii in late March or April for the
express purpose of describing these relationships. On his return, a staff
unit, headed by Maj. Gen. Walter H. “Tony” Frank, in a followup
visit, had spent a week reaching accord on the principal details.
Colonel Combs represented Headquarters Twentieth Air Force on this
mission. The results were favorable indeed.

Thinking the Joint Chiefs-approved command relationship had
been explained, perhaps I was undiplomatic in presenting my under-
standing of it. Fortunately I had the forethought to bring a copy of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff agreement on the subject, which I produced.
Admiral Nimitz studied it intently and said:

I must say to you that I am in strong disagreement with these
arrangements. If I had been aware of their extent I would have
expressed this disagreement to Admiral King and the Joint Chiefs. I
command all of US forces in the Pacific Ocean Area. This is an
abrogation of the chain of command. However this is the decision of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and I say to you again, I will give you all
the help and cooperation in my capability. You have my very best
wishes for success.

He was a good as his word. I had good reason to be grateful for
his continued support. But he ended on an ominous note. He said:
“You are probably in for a rough time. You are going out to the
Forward Area where my commander, Vice Admiral John Hoover,
breaks my admirals and throws them overboard without the slightest
compunction. God knows what he is going to do to you.” When I got

173

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 195 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

to know Admiral Nimitz better, I recognized the vein of merry humor
that flowed beneath a sometimes stern visage. But at the time I was
somewhat shaken.

When I finally arrived at Saipan, I called upon Vice Adm. John
H. Hoover, Commander of the Forward Area. He could not have been
more cordial and helpful. I kept him constantly advised of my
problems and progress, and I enjoyed his strong support. I made it a
point to follow his advice and suggestions whenever I felt I could.

My movement to Saipan had been conducted in supposed secrecy.
When I left my wife in San Antonio to return overseas, I did not even
tell her which ocean I was going over—Atlantic or Pacific. The night
of our arrival in Saipan, “Tokyo Rose” broadcast a welcome to Saipan
for “General ’Possum’ Hansell” over the J apanese radio network. This
may have seemed amusing to many, but to one it was almost tragic.
Col. Richard H. Carmichael, commander of a B~29 group operating
from Chengtu, was shot down over Japan and captured. He was
hauled before a Japanese investigator who demanded to know why I
was called “Possum.” When he professed ignorance, he was beaten
unmercifully. This went on for days, until the Japanese finally
concluded he really didn’t know—which was all too painfully true.
Years later at a cocktail party, he asked my wife, Dotta, why I was
called “Possum.” She said she had found an old prep-school annual
bearing my likeness at age thirteen with the explanation, ‘‘He is called
"Possum’ because he looks like one.” I have been steadfast in a
minority dissent on this report ever since, to no avail.

A survey of conditions on Saipan caused dismay. Of the two bases
under construction, one could not be used at all by B-29s. The other
had one runway 7,000 feet long (5,000 feet of it paved), a taxiway at
one end only, about 40 hardstands, and no other facilities whatever
except for a bomb dump and a vehicle park with gasoline truck-
trailers. It was hardly ready to receive the 12,000 men and 180 aircraft
of the 73d Wing. Ground crews put up borrowed tents in what was
surely one of the most disorderly military encampments of the war,
but they worked day and night to meet the demands for the first strike.

174

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 196 ---
Chapter V

Early Operations

The base on nearby Tinian Island had hardly been started. Those
on Guam, where the main Headquarters of the XXI Bomber
Command was to be located, had not even been laid out. Communica-
tions were completely inadequate. The aircraft of the 73d Wing
arrived rapidly on Saipan after mid-October 1944 and had to be
double parked on hardstands. In the meantime, a shipload of supplies
reached Guam, destined to become a depot. The ship had been
carefully loaded so the supplies could be unloaded in reverse sequence
and stacked at the depot in “combat-loaded” order. The procedure
was a new and elaborate one that would give us an operating depot in
a matter of weeks. Actually, fighting was still going on in Guam when
the depot ship arrived, and confusion reigned supreme. The harbor
master said, “I’ll give you twenty-four hours to get that goddamned
ship out of here.”

Before I learned what was happening, the supplies were dumped
in the jungle. They were never recovered. We had to provide aircraft
supplies for the B-29s (themselves new and unfamiliar) by air from
Sacramento, California—8,000 miles away! The in-commission rate of
the B-29s was astonishingly high—considering the circumstances.

As indicated earlier, the strategic concept was for the defeat or
neutralization of the Japanese air forces as an “overriding intermediate
objective.” Thereafter, the major strategic air offensive was to be

175

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 197 ---
BRIG. GEN. HAYWOOD S. HANSELL, Commanding Gener-

al, XXI Bomber Command, briefs pilots before a mission over
Tokyo.

176

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 198 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

launched against the war-supporting and economic systems of Japan.
These systems were the “primary objectives.” The plan of operations
against them contemplated the destruction of certain major industrial
facilities by selective target bombing.

The overriding intermediate objective and its associated target
system, assigned to XXI Bomber Command by agreement of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, gave first place to Japanese factories building airplanes
and aircraft engines. This assignment was not lightly conceived, for it
had been learned in Europe that air superiority is essential to strategic
air operations as well as to surface operations and invasions. The Joint
Chiefs had been persuaded to back the air offensive, but they were
looking over the shoulders of the airmen at the invasion shore.

The primary targets, to be destroyed after the Japanese aircraft
industry, were of two kinds: selected targets, to be destroyed by
precision bombing; and urban targets, to be destroyed by incendiary
attack. Precision bombing of selected targets was the preferred
method. But it was believed that small, “home-shop” type production
facilities were distributed in the great cities of Japan. Those cities were
known to be highly flammable. Incendiary attack of urban areas was
listed high among approved target lists because of these urban shops
and also because the cities were the focal points of Japanese “will to
resist.” The targets initially assigned the XXI Bomber Command were
aircraft and engine factories supporting the intermediate objective,
and they had overriding priority. They were selected targets requiring
precision, daylight attack. Japanese shipping was also high on the
target priority list.

It must be remembered that the Twentieth Air Force had won its
right to exist only by becoming a creature of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Strategic air leaders believed the war could be won by air power, but
the official war plans of the Joint Chiefs contemplated invasion, and
the Twentieth could not divorce itself entirely from that ultimate
concept. Certainly that was wise in the early stages. Air power alone
had never before been sufficient to force capitulation of a major nation
still in full control of its own military means. What if the strategic air
offensive should not be effective? The Chiefs simply had to have a
backup plan. To be sure, there was some skepticism of air power, but

177

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 199 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

even if there had not been, it would have been unwise not to furnish a
backup. Actually, the Joint Chiefs of Staff did give the Twentieth Air
Force a priority second-to-none in the creation and launching of the
air offensive, and they did direct the capture of the Marianas as a base
of operations for the XXI Bomber Command.

The pattern of B—29 operations against Japanese targets was not
conditioned by the limited concept of airpower’s role, as a preparatory
bombing operation preliminary to the basic strategy of defeating Japan
by surface invasion. The first target list had as its purpose the defeat of
the Japanese Air Force. This, like the defeat of the German Air Force,
was an intermediate objective, a necessary preliminary to ensure and
enhance the effectiveness of strategic bombing operations. No doubt
that goal also helped assure the success of future ground and sea
operations. But the initial primary air aims were practically the same
as those in Germany—the paralysis of the military, economic,
industrial, and social structure supporting the will and the ability of
the Japanese nation to wage war.

First Strikes

Plans for the maiden bombing of Japan from the Marianas called
for a combined first strike with the Navy, so carrier-based aircraft
would divert and absorb some of the Japanese fighter defenses. For the
rest, the B—29s would have to rely upon high altitude and speed (their
chief advantage) and their own defensive gunfire. The B-29 was
designed as a high-altitude bomber, the first with pressurized crew
compartments. It had turbosupercharged engines, was reasonably fast
at high altitudes, and was heavily gunned. By operating in formation,
it was expected to fend for itself against enemy fighters which would
be operating at their ceiling and have little, if any, margin of
performance superiority.

The first aircraft and crews to touch down on Saipan were given a
little training in the Pacific area. Six short training missions were
flown against Truk and Iwo Jima. In spite of all the obstacles, the XXI
Bomber Command declared itself ready to meet combat commitments
exactly on time—by the middle of November.

178

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 200 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

In early morning of November 1, 1944, an F-13A (a photo-
reconnaissance version of the B-29) took off from Saipan to become
the first U.S. plane over Tokyo since the Doolittle raid in April 1942.
The crewmembers, led by Capt. Ralph D. Steakley, insisted upon an
immediate mission, even though they had just arrived from the United
States. I advised a rest but they were persistent. Thank God they were.
They found clear skies over Japan—a phenomenon. Called “Tokyo
Rose,” the aircraft flew above the Japanese capital at 32,000 feet,
photographing a complex of aircraft and engine plants just west of
Tokyo and another on the outskirts of Nagoya. They shot over 7,000
excellent photographs. Before the first strike on Tokyo on November
24, 17 sorties had been flown over Japan by F—13s. Many of the
missions were hampered by bad weather, but sufficient information on
the location of aircraft factories was secured for the first bombing
missions. Copies of the photographs were sent to General Arnold for
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and to Admirals Nimitz and Halsey. Mosaics
were made, strips laid out, and initial points and target approaches
selected. Every crew was required to trace its photo map, mark
landmarks and target runs, and then redraw them from memory—
over and over.

As the day for the combined operation against Japan approached,
the Navy found itself in serious combat trouble in its involvement with
the Japanese fleet and movement into the Philippines. It therefore
announced it could not take part in the planned combined air
operation against Japan. The Navy recommended postponing the joint
strike against Japan and grounding the B-29s until it could partici-
pate. I got word of this recommendation and notified General Arnold
we would be ready to conduct the air attack in November as planned,
without Navy support. I did not like the idea that the B-29s could
operate only with Navy assistance. If that were the case, the B-29s
might better be turned over to Admiral Nimitz. However, I did have
our limited number of B-29s loaded up with 2,000-pound bombs and
put on alert to support the Navy in the battle of the Philippine Sea,
which was then raging. I told Admiral Hoover we stood ready to offer
such assistance as he might request, and we would welcome Navy
officers to go with us as recognition experts. I did this for two reasons:

179

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 201 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

We were still too weak to attack Japan but genuinely wished to help.
And I was worried lest Admiral Nimitz invoke the emergency clause
and take command of the B—29s. He might take a long time to release
command. By volunteering our services I hoped to forestall his official
action. We were not called upon, but I think the gesture was
appreciated and was effective.

The first planned strikes were labeled San Antonio I and II. I was
to lead the first, and Brig. Gen. Emmett ‘Rosey’ O’Donnell, Jr., 73d
Wing Commander, was to lead the second. These plans were reported
to Washington in detail. To my surprise, General Arnold ordered me
not to lead the mission. I presumed it was because of my extensive
knowledge of the Pacific campaign plans. It was concern for just this
possibility that had prompted me to make a special request about a
month or so earlier. Just before leaving for the Pacific, I had been
summoned to Washington to be briefed on a highly secret matter. I
presume it was either on the atomic bomb or Ultra. I asked if the
knowledge I was about to receive would keep me from flying combat
missions. The answer was, “Yes.” I asked to be excused from receiving
the information, because I felt it imperative that I be free to lead my
command if the going got rough. This request was honored and I
proceeded without the briefing.

Now, it seemed to me, was the time when I should lead. The going
was likely to be rough, and there was deep concern in the command
about the chances of successfully performing the mission. I decided to
ignore instructions, lead the mission, and hope for the best. My hope
was short lived. Two or three days after advising Washington of our
plans, I was called upon by a Navy lieutenant and a petty officer who
had a copy of the message and demanded a written acknowledgment
of its receipt. The message had been sent through Navy channels.

At the time I thought the decision was arbitrary and ill taken. Of
course, I did know of the strategic plans for the Pacific war, but plans
are constantly changing, and I had only a rudimentary knowledge of
the atomic bomb. But there was another factor I overlooked at the
time and did not think of until much later: I was thought to be privy to
the existence of supersecret intelligence and, what was much more
important, to the sensitive source of such information. The story is out

180

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 202 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

now after thirty years of secrecy. It is told in fascinating detail in The
Ultra Secret by the man responsible for it, Gp. Capt. Frederick W.
Winterbotham, RAF. It is the story of the breaking of the most secret
codes of the Germans and the Japanese. I was aware of the breaking of
the Japanese code but I was actually unaware of Ultra.

How I could have forgotten this item is incredible. It had been the
source of daily agony as far as I was concerned. For several months
before I took over the XXI Bomber Command, General Arnold
required Generals White and Kuter and me to meet in his inner office
every morning. We were admitted at 0730. At 0715, General Arnold
received the daily verbatim translations of high-level, secret German
and Japanese messages. Before we entered, we were each familiar with
the U.S. secret messages exchanged during the night. We were
therefore prepared to present and discuss events pertaining to our
several interests and responsibilities. However, we did not get Ultra
messages directly. General Arnold would reveal the information he
had just been given and demand to know what we were doing about it.
We were not doing anything about it; we did not know about it. Even
so, this did not save us from withering comments about our
competence. Doubtless, General Arnold enjoyed this game, but it was
pretty rough business to be on the receiving end.

Now that same supersecret intelligence I did not receive was
returning to bite me again. There was an Allied agreement, without
deviation of any sort, forbidding recipients of Ultra information and
those who knew of its source from exposing themselves to capture.
This may well have been the clinching argument in my case. The
message from General Arnold could no longer be ignored. I designat-
ed General O’Donnell to lead San Antonio I.

I faced a very serious command dilemma. As Commanding
General, XXI Bomber Command, I found myself in a severe
predicament. Three nearly simultaneous events combined to make my
position difficult. First was the Navy recommendation that the
mission be canceled or indefinitely postponed until the Navy was
ready to participate. If I accepted this, it would clearly show that the
XXI Bomber Command could not operate independently but must do
so solely in close concert with the Navy. If this were true, why have a

181

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 203 ---
STRATEGIC BOMBING MISSIONS OVER JAPAN are re-
viewed on a B-29 base in the Marianas by (left to right) Brig. Gen.
Emmett O’Donnell, Jr., Lt. Gen. Millard F. Harmon, and Brig.
Gen. Haywood S. Hansell, Jr.

WRECKAGE of JAPANESE DIVE BOMBERS lines the run-
ways on Tinian in the Marianas, March 1945.

182

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 204 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

separate Twentieth Air Force chain of command? Since coordination
would be needed, and it could be furnished only by the Commander in
Chief of the Pacific Ocean Area, Admiral Nimitz, why not place the
XXI Bomber Command under his control? This would almost
certainly destroy the strategic air war against Japan as a war-winning
grand strategy—one in which I and my fellow airmen fervently
believed. I had hastened to notify General Arnold that the XXI
Bomber Command stood ready to discharge the mission without Navy
assistance. Any equivocation now would place the Twentieth Air
Force and the strategic air war against Japan in serious jeopardy.

Second, I received a disturbing message from General Arnold.
Members of General Arnold’s staff and at least one top-level AAF
field commander, to whom my plan (San Antonio I) had been passed
for comment, voiced grave doubts that we could carry out our mission.
Gen. George Kenney predicted the planned operation would result in
disaster. General Arnold forwarded these expressions of doubt and
wrote in his own hand the comment that he was inclined to agree with
the skeptics. The contention was that the airplanes lacked the
necessary range and furthermore the Japanese would “shoot them out
of the air.”” General Arnold did not direct me to abandon or modify
the mission. Rather, he put me on record as having been warned. He
concluded with the statement that he had high respect for the critics of
the mission, but said if I were convinced of its feasibility and were
determined to carry on, then I was at liberty to do so. He left the
decision up to me and said if I chose to go ahead, he wished me luck.
The effect was chilling. The warning was coming from the very people
from whom I had expected firmest support.

Third, I received a handwritten letter from my senior wing
commander, General O’Donnell, stating that he, too doubted if his
unit could fulfill the mission. He suggested abandoning the daylight
attack and substituting a night one against some area target. In a
private meeting with him, I pointed out that the night operation he
proposed would not accomplish the mission with which I was charged.
I was determined to see the mission through, and if he was unwilling
to lead his wing in this operation, I would turn it over to someone who
was. (Brig. Gen. Roger M. Ramey, my Deputy, was anxious to head

183

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 205 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

it.) O'Donnell assured me he was willing but had felt constrained to
vent his doubts and worries. I recognized his right and obligation to
give me, in private, his honest opinion. If the mission failed and he had
not warned me of his true convictions, I would have been justified in
reproaching him. On the strength of this, with his agreement I
destroyed his letter. I explained that if the mission succeeded, the
letter would be a black mark on his record that would be hard to live
down. If we failed, the onus would be entirely on my head, since I had
been warned from other quarters.

It was quite true that until the time for takeoff of San Antonio I,
the XXI Bomber Command had never flown a formation as large as a
squadron, a distance as far as Tokyo and back, and had not flown
against any enemy opposition. But the potential impact of the mission
on Pacific strategy and the future of the Air Force extended far
beyond the XXI. The Army Air Forces, at the Joint Chiefs of Staff
planning and command level, had been advocating primary reliance
upon the decisive effectiveness of the air offensive, with provision for
an invasion of the Japanese mainland only if the air offensive proved
inconclusive. This viewpoint did not mesh with Army and Navy
planning. To admit at this late juncture in November 1944 that the air
offensive could not even attack its intermediate objectives, would have
grave repercussions indeed. The whole command structure of the
Twentieth Air Force as a worldwide command, reporting directly to
the Joint Chiefs in a role parallel to that of the U.S. naval fleet, was in
delicate balance. To subject it to reexamination resulting from a major
degradation of capability would have had serious after-effects. To
those who believed the air offensive was not only the most effective
avenue to victory in the Pacific but also the cheapest in terms of
American lives, abandoning the planned mission would be a disaster
almost as great as the tactical disaster of failure might have been. Still,
there was no denying that the decision to carry out the plan was
extremely risky.

I thought I understood why General Arnold had sent me this
message. Disaster on the first mission of the XXI Bomber Command
would have altered Pacific strategy and would have delayed recogni-
tion of coordinate air power by many years. Since it seemed highly

184

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 206 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

probable such a disaster would ensue, the ill effects would be less
severe on the future of the Army Air Forces if the responsibility were
borne by a subordinate field commander. Arnold had warned me, and
I had chosen to go ahead in spite of the warning. His was not an
unreasonable precaution to take under the circumstances. I decided to
go on with the mission and so notified him.

Rosey O’Donnell asked for a change in the operational plan. I had
set up two initial points, on opposite sides of the target, and planned
for two converging bombing runs to confuse and divide the enemy air
defenses. It called for a complicated maneuver. Rosey suggested the
plan be simplified by using only one axis of attack, with Fujiyama
volcano, west of Tokyo, as the initial point. I approved the change.

During preparation for the first strike, a delegation of congress-
men visited my command. I was extremely busy. We seemed to be
operating under one of Murphy’s laws, “Anything that can go wrong
will go wrong.” I quartered the visiting congressmen in my own
pyramidal tent, perched on a promontory jutting out into the sea. I
issued each of them a mess kit and invited them to join me in the chow
line and to wash their own kits afterward as I was doing. I must admit
the chow was simply awful, but we were living on a shoestring and
spending all our energies on training and preparation for the mission. I
devoted as much time to the visitors as I felt able and told them of our
general plans, problems, and expectations. I did not go into the details
of operations and tactics. We kept those pretty close to the vest
because security leaks would endanger our success and cost lives
among our combat crews.

The group went back to Washington and wrote a scathing
denunciation of my administrative arrangements. They also had
interviewed members of my command who were from their home
districts. Most of the responses were understandably flavored with
apprehension about the forthcoming campaign. This problem was a
forerunner of the massive difficulties that were to fall upon future
American commanders in the field during the Korean and Vietnam
Wars.

The first mission was laid on for November 17. At the final
briefing before dawn, I made a short talk to the crews:

185

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 207 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Stick together. Don’t let fighter attacks break up the formations.
And put the bombs on the target. If the bombs don’t hit the target
all our efforts, risks, worries, and work will be for nothing. That’s
what we're here for. If we do our job, this is the beginning of the
end for Japan. Put the bombs on the target. You can do it.

Crews took their stations in the early dawn. The long line of
B-29s formed up on the taxiway that led to one end of the runway. To
extend our range, we were carrying an extra tank of gasoline in the
front bomb bay [gross take off weight was about 140,000 pounds]. At
the last moment, the wind, which had consistently blown down the
runway, died down. We needed that wind badly to get off with our
heavy loads. Then the wind reversed direction and freshened. It was
impossible to taxi to the other end of the runway because the long line
of B-29s could not be reversed. We could not use the runway itself to
taxi down and then take off by successive airplanes, because the taxi
time would have been excessive, causing long delays in assembly, and
burning up too much of our precious fuel.

There was no choice. I had to call off the mission. I hated to do so.
We had built up to a psychological climax. Delay would play on fears
and apprehension. It was one of the hardest decisions I had to make,
but it was one of the luckiest. In a few hours, a typhoon hit Saipan and
lasted six days. Then it traveled north toward Japan on our route to
our targets. It left our base a shambles and a sea of mud. If the
typhoon had arrived a few hours later, we would already have taken
off—and found no way to make a landing on return. The B—29s sat on
their hardstands, two deep, fully loaded, for a week. The orders had
been distributed. The thought of a security leak was a nightmare. A
daily weather flight followed the typhoon northward. To my great
grief, one of them was lost and never heard from again.

On November 24, 111 B~29s of the 73d Bombardment Wing, XXI
Bomber Command, took off on the trip toward Japan. They represent-
ed over 90 percent of the B-29s on Saipan. Some of the crews had
arrived less than a week before, and their first takeoff was for Tokyo.
Each lift-off was an ordeal. As noted earlier, the B—29 was originally
designed for a gross weight of 120,000 pounds. By urging and
pleading, we had convinced the engineers at Wright Field to raise the

186

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 208 ---
ORDNANCE SPECIALISTS LOAD BOMBS on a Boeing
Superfortress on Saipan, Marianas, November 1944.

BOMBER CREWS LISTEN ATTENTIVELY to the pre-mis-
sion briefing for the XXI Bomber Command’s first mission to
Tokyo, November 1944.

187

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 209 ---
A TWENTIETH AIR FORCE B-29 SUPERFORTRESS runs
up its engines before taxiing out for take-off on a mission over
Tokyo, December 1944.

GROUND PERSONNEL WATCH A BOEING B-29 take off
on the first bombing mission from Saipan to Tokyo, November
1944.

188

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 210 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

allowable gross takeoff weight of the B—29s to 132,000 pounds. Now,
to carry every gallon of gas that could be pumped aboard, they were
taking off at 140,000 pounds! A faltering engine would spell the end
for any aircraft.

Primary target for the B—29s on San Antonio I was the Musashino
aircraft plant of the Nakajima Aircraft Company on the outskirts of
Tokyo. The secondary targets and “last resort” areas were the docking
facilities and urban areas of Tokyo. A total of 277.5 tons of bombs was
delivered. Seventeen bombers turned back because of fuel problems,
and 6 missed their bombing runs due to mechanical troubles. Flying
between 27,000 and 33,000 feet, the bombers picked up a 120-knot
wind over Japan, giving them a ground speed of 445 miles per hour.
Twenty-four planes bombed the Nakajima plant on the outskirts of
Tokyo, and 64 unloaded on the Tokyo dock areas. Only 1 B-29 was
lost in combat. U.S. gunners claimed 7 enemy fighters destroyed and
18 probables. Final count for the XXI Bomber Command listed 2
B-29s destroyed, 8 damaged by enemy action, | man killed, 1 missing,
and 4 injured. After the war, records indicated that 48 bombs had hit
the factory area: 1 percent of the buildings and 2.4 percent of the
machinery were damaged; 57 persons were killed and 75 injured.

The weather at the target had been far from favorable, and the
bombing results left much to be desired. But losses were small, and the
operation was completed despite the hazards and obstacles. Not the
least of the hazards was the return flight to base. The mission lasted
twelve to fourteen hours. Landing was at night with no runway lights
and only smudge pots along the single runway strip. The next nearest
landing strip was at Kwajalein, over a thousand miles away. If a B-29
splattered itself on the runway, the rest of the aircraft behind it, with
nowhere to land, would be all through.

Perhaps in hindsight, the decision to launch the offensive in the
face of such adverse conditions and recommendations seems reckless,
and the results the product more of good luck than sound judgment.
But this first great gamble proved the feasibility of the assault.
Momentum, confidence, and improved efficiency would come with
experience and numbers. In my opinion, if the decision had been to
“stand down” San Antonio I and substitute a night attack against

189

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 211 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

some urban areas, the result would have been catastrophic, particular-
ly as regards confidence in and continuation of the Twentieth Air
Force.

San Antonio II was staged on November 27 with the same target
objectives. The crews of the eighty-one B-29s that flew the mission
found Tokyo completely covered by clouds, so the bombs were
dropped by radar on the secondary targets. The Japanese were
provoked into trying to halt the bombing. From Iwo Jima they made
one-way suicide air raids on Isley Field, our base on Saipan, destroying
some B-29s. The Japanese had realized that their home islands were
indeed susceptible to sustained attack and that their fighters could not
turn back the B-29s.

Improving Successive Missions

The accomplishment of these first two missions, with very light
losses, was an achievement in itself. The fact that bombing results were
only fair could be overlooked in view of the proof that the force could
indeed reach its targets and return to base. But succeeding missions
made it clear that bombing accuracy would have to be greatly
improved. Two methods were adopted to achieve that end—training in
visual bombing techniques and the introduction of radar to assist and
even substitute for optical bombing in attacks against selected
precision targets.

A “lead crew” school was set up, and one B-29 from each
squadron was set aside for training. This was rather a drastic move.
We were desperately short of B-29s, and withdrawing at least twelve
B-29s for training out of about one hundred aircraft in operational
condition was critical weakening of the force. But there was no use
sending bombers to Japan at all if they could not destroy the targets.

The other method to improve bombing simply made good sense.
The AN/APQ-13 radar bombing equipment was used to supplement
the bombing run with the Norden optical sight. Initial points were
chosen that afforded good radar images. As each formation ap-
proached the initial point, the turn to the bombing run was made from
observations by the radar-bombardier. He next conducted a radar

190

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 212 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

bombing run, using the target if possible, or an offset aiming point if
necessary. The radar-bombardier could then assist the optical-bombar-
dier in setting up his bomb run. In this manner, it was possible to set
into the optical sight the drift angle and rate of ground speed and to
have the crosshairs of the optical sight aligned approximately on the
target. Then if the target became visible through breaks in the clouds,
only minor adjustments of the optical sight were needed. Although the
bombs could be released on the radar sight if the clouds obscured the
target from visual adjustment, the accuracy was inferior to visual
sighting. For acceptably accurate radar sighting, we would have to
prepare radar maps of the targets and determine precise locations of
targets with reference to good offset aiming points.

Several events with a sobering impact on me occurred during the
first ten days of operations. The first of these took place when
Japanese fighters commenced strafing attacks on our Saipan air base
and parked B—29s. They had come down from Iwo Jima on a one-way
suicide mission and were completely undetected by the Marine outfit
that was supposed to furnish our air defense. One such attack began
around noon on November 27. I jumped in my jeep with Col. John B.
Montgomery, my Chief of Staff, and headed for the field. As we came
up a rise onto the flying field, I found myself looking straight into a
Japanese fighter that was strafing the area. I brought the jeep to a halt
and sought shelter under it. Quick as my reaction had been, it still was
not quick enough. Colonel Montgomery was already there.

Fortunately, the wing was out on a mission over Japan and there
were only a few B—29s on the ground. But several of these B—29s were
bombers which had aborted the mission and were on the hardstands
fully loaded with bombs and gasoline. The main warning radar, which
the Marines should have installed on a hill, was still in crates. There
had been ample time for installation, but the Marines simply did not
expect suicide attacks. General Arnold was understandably outraged.
He had warned of this possibility but suitable action was not taken to
provide defenses.

Another incident had to do with Operation Memphis One, which
was returning to Saipan when an intense tropical storm hit the island.
It was about 2030 and the rain was so heavy that, standing in the

191

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 213 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

improvised tower, I could not see the dim smudge pots outlining the
single runway. Over eighty B-29s were approaching the field. The air
was full of calls saying, “number such-and-such B—29, I am approach-
ing Saipan. Visibility zero. I am out of gasoline. Request instructions.”
The tower operator was a noncommissioned officer who earned my
highest admiration. He was calm and issued instructions without a
hint of panic. The only thing we could do was hope the storm, which
had arrived suddenly, would depart with equal dispatch, and that the
fuel gauges which read zero did not really mean it. We were fortunate.
The storm did clear. The B-29s landed in rapid succession. I realized
then that I really was quite helpless. The real Commander of the XXI
Bomber Command was a noncommissioned officer who was function-
ing superbly as the tower operator. The best help I could give him was
to keep out of his way and avoid interfering with him.

In another incident one evening, an air raid warning sounded and
all lights were doused. A Japanese twin-engined bomber made a
couple of passes. Roger Ramey, my Deputy Commander, and I were
standing on the runway watching the antiaircraft bursts when the
bomber suddenly reappeared at very low altitude. A couple of B-29s
had been hit and were burning brightly. They lit up the sky, and the
oncoming Japanese aircraft was clearly visible. I think we noted
something about it at just the same instant, because we took
immediate and identical action. It was making a low-level strafing
attack down the runway we were standing on. There was no place to
go. We hit the pavement with great force at just the same time.
Tracers from the ground defenses were pouring into the Japanese
bomber but it continued on course. Then, as it approached the end of
the runway, it swerved slightly and plowed into the ground. The pilot
evidently had been killed. The bomber hit with a roar about a hundred
yards from us and was engulfed in flames. Just as we were rising to our
feet, there was a violent explosion. Evidently it still had bombs aboard.

That evening was replete with mental impressions as well. As soon
as the attack started, the base was aswarm with thousands of men
eager and determined to see what was going on. They were completely
beyond control. Two B-29s were burning like torches, and there were
other B-29s nearby. Men pushed and pulled to get the other sixty-ton

192

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 214 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

monsters away from the fire. The B-29s were fully loaded with
gasoline. Some of them had bombs aboard in preparation for
tomorrow’s mission. No one seemed to know which of them had
bombs and which had not. Succor came from an unbidden and
unexpected source: the engineers. They appeared on the scene with
their massive bulldozers and earth-moving equipment. They pushed
the flaming carcasses aside, piled dirt on them, and rode over them
until they had crushed out the fires. It was the most amazing sight I
have ever seen. No one knew for sure that there were not bombs in
those flaming masses. Fifty-caliber ammunition was going off like
firecrackers. The scene was an animated illustration out of Dante’s
Inferno. Engineers were riding in bulldozers through flames reaching
high in the air; enormous monsters of steel were burying other
monsters which threatened to lash back and blow up at any moment. I
still do not know whose idea it was for the engineers to take this
action. It certainly was not mine. I really think it was a spontaneous
reaction from the engineers themselves. I have always regretted that I
did not get them a unit combat citation. It certainly was heroism far
beyond the call of duty.

The next three months (November 1944 through January 1945)
were frustrating, to say the least. Schools worked hard to train the lead
crews, determined to improve bombing accuracy. Enormous efforts
were made to upgrade maintenance. The depot had to start all over
again, and in the meantime the air supply from Sacramento had to be
improved. More missions were run against Japanese engine and
aircraft factories. But the weather was a terrible opponent, and there
was no intelligence of its movements. Japanese fighter opposition was
desperate but not deadly, at least in comparison with German fighters.
Air kamikaze-ramming tactics were tried with some success. Morale
was a critical problem. The airplane engines were still unreliable.
Aircraft disabled from combat or other causes were 1,500 miles from
friendly territory. The crews had the choice of drowning or bailing out
over Japan, to be executed by maddened Japanese. The U.S. Navy
contributed tremendously to morale by stationing rescue submarines
at intervals along the route. Their performance was superb. One
submarine entered Tokyo Bay in daylight and picked up a B-29 crew

193

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 215 ---
A B-29 FLIES OVER THE HARBOR OF SAIPAN—headquar-
ters of the XXI Bomber Command.

WITH NO. 4 EN-
GINE FEATH-
ERED, a Superfor-
tress lands on Saipan
after a successful
mission against To-
kyo.

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 216 ---
A REINFORCED
CONCRETE
STRUCTURE at the
Musashino aircraft
engine plant escaped
the brunt of the AAF
bombing attacks,
which severely dam-
aged the weaker
buildings.

BRIG. GEN. HANSELL visits with Col. Seth S. Terry of XXI
Bomber Command.

195

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 217 ---
DESPITE THE THREAT OF EXPLOSION, aviation engineers
ram their bulldozer into a burning B-29, pushing dirt over the

flames. The near-disaster was caused by a low-level Japanese
attack on the Saipan airfield, November 1944.

.

- & , ¥ * ¥, «

A BULLDOZER PULLS THE TAIL OF A SUPERFORTRESS
away from the burning wreckage following the Japanese raid on
Saipan, November 1944.

196

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 218 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

right under the guns of the Japanese. From November 1944 to August
1945, 600 Twentieth Air Force flyers were saved in open-sea rescues.
The system involved Navy flying boats, B-17s (Dumbos) carrying
droppable lifeboats, B—29s (Superdumbos), and submarines, all under
Navy control. The system was largely the achievement of my Navy
Liaison Officer, Comdr. George C. McGhee.

On December 13, 1944, 74 B—29s of the 73d Wing received credit
for doing significant damage to Japanese aircraft plants. Most of the
bombers carried 500—pound general purpose bombs, while others were
loaded with incendiary clusters. The primary target was the Mitsubi-
shi engine plant at Nagoya. Photographs failed to show all the
damage. Later reports disclosed that engine assembly shops and
auxiliary buildings were destroyed or damaged. A total of 246 people
were killed and 105 injured. Aircraft engine production capacity was
reduced from 1,600 to 1,200 per month. The Mitsubishi No. 4 Engine
Works no longer made parts. The Japanese also began transferring
plant equipment to underground facilities. It was the most destructive
mission to date for XXI Bomber Command.

The order for succeeding missions was for maximum strikes
against top-priority targets by high-altitude precision bombing when
weather was acceptable. When it was not, secondary targets were to be
hit and time was also given to single-aircraft night operations,
collecting weather data, and radar bombing. Bombing results re-
mained hard to assess due to cloud cover, and were deliberately played
down by XXI Bomber Command Headquarters. I wanted to build a
reputation for credibility in the XXI’s reports to counterbalance the
known tendency to exaggerate. Our whole energy was devoted to
improved effectiveness and accuracy.

During November and December 1944, forty-nine photo missions
were flown and, by January 1945, thousands of photographs of
Japanese targets had been taken. These missions performed five
functions for the XXI Bomber Command: photo reconnaissance for
target and strategic intelligence, weather reconnaissance, radar scope
photography, lead-crew training, and nuisance raids.

197

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 219 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

The Aerial Mining Campaign

Preparation for aerial mining operations against shipping in
Japanese home waters was likewise started during this early period.
Later, Dr. Frederick M. Sallagar, while with the RAND Corporation
(but a member of my 4th Operations Analysis Section in 1944),
completed a postwar study, Lessons From an Aerial Mining Campaign
(Operation STARVATION). Dr. Sallagar showed clearly that the
aerial mining of Japanese inland waters by B—29s of the Twentieth Air
Force’s XXI Bomber Command was a tremendous success and
contributed enormously to the fall of Japan. He further noted a
reluctance on the part of senior Air Corps officers to enter into this
operation with the enthusiasm it deserved. As Commanding General
of the XXI Bomber Command, I was one of those reluctant leaders.
But there were reasons for my reluctance.

Army Air Forces leaders, including me, remembered what had
happened in Germany. AWPD-1 committed the American bomber
units to the factories, industrial systems, and enemy air bases in
Germany. But these units were split apart and half assigned to the
Allied forces invading North Africa in Operation Torch. This afforded
a bitter lesson: Theater commanders, accustomed to seeking victory
through surface warfare, would demand and get strategic air to
support their ground campaigns at the expense of strategic air
objectives. The Eighth Air Force had hardly recovered from this
nearly mortal blow, when the ordeal was again endured in preparation
for and during the invasion of Normandy. Strategic targets in
Germany were neglected far too long while air power was tied down in
ground operations. Consequently, the appeal for aerial bombing of
Japanese waterways found a cool reception in the first months of the
XXI’s operations. It looked like one more diversion to the local needs
of a ground commander, and away from primary industrial targets
leading to defeat of the enemy air force. So the mining program, which
proved to be one of the principal achievements of the Twentieth Air
Force, met with initial opposition.

Mining of rivers and harbors in the Netherlands East Indies by
the B-29s of the XX Bomber Command had been one of the first

198

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 220 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

operations conducted by that command from bases in Ceylon.
However, Admiral Nimitz’s staff proposed a much more extensive
campaign for XXI Bomber Command in Japanese home waters. In
fact, the Navy’s first proposal would have absorbed the total capacity
of the XXI for the first three or four months of its operations. I
objected to this on the ground that it was another major diversion
from the chief purpose for which the command had been created and
deployed. The objection was not directed against the idea of mining
itself, but to the magnitude of the diversion at a time when utmost
endeavor was needed to develop our primary capability.

I was not, of course, in a position to change the directive issued by
the Joint Chiefs of Staff. But when General Arnold sought my
recommendations on Admiral Nimitz’s request, I opposed the applica-
tion of so much of the XXI Bomber Command at that time to aerial
mining. I recommended postponement until the force had grown and
suggested that one group be charged with developing the technique
and with limited initial operations. The problem was settled when
General Arnold issued a directive calling for a somewhat postponed
mining effort at a much reduced initial level.

Even as the problem was being discussed at high level, steps were
taken to prepare for a mining campaign of some intensity. I directed
the 313th Bombardment Wing, whose aircraft began to arrive on
Tinian in December, to develop tactics and techniques for aerial
mining. One group of the wing was designated to do this work. The
XXI Bomber Command owed a debt of gratitude to the Navy
personnel who assisted in adapting Navy mines to installation in
B-29s and in helping develop dropping techniques and tactics.

When Maj. Gen. Curtis LeMay later took over the XXI Bomber
Command,* his decision to launch a massive mining operation was a
sound one. Adequate forces had been assembled. Tactics and tech-
niques had been worked out (many of them by LeMay). Since mining
was not dependent on weather, it was possible to achieve continuity of
operations. I think General LeMay did not view mining at night as

*General LeMay succeeded me as Commanding General of the XXI on January 20, 1945.

199

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 221 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

abandonment of selective targeting. Moreover, the night mining, like
the night urban bombing, could be carried out regardless of cloud
cover at the target. It is quite clear I could have endorsed mining as an
aspect of strategic bombardment against the Japanese transportation
system rather than as an auxiliary aspect of the sea blockade. I
probably could have persuaded General Arnold to stretch my target
priorities as prescribed by the Joint Chiefs to include aerial mining
when sufficient aircraft became available. I doubt if I could have, or
should have, devoted most of the command’s air power to this purpose
in the initial phase of strategic attack against Japan, when first priority
was prescribed as destruction of the Japanese aircraft industry.

In retrospect, the actual evolution of events was probably about
right. The XXI Bomber Command did attain the “overriding
intermediate objective of undermining Japanese aircraft production.”
It did preserve its identity and structure as a separate command even
though operating in an area under Navy jurisdiction. And it did retain
unity of effort while subjected to constant pressure to become
subordinate to other commanders and staff agencies. These achieve-
ments might have been jeopardized or at least delayed if the XXI
Bomber Command had initially devoted its capacity to aerial mining,
and the independence of the XXI might have been compromised or
lost.

The aerial mining campaign as pursued by General LeMay
succeeded beyond anyone’s expectation. Fleet Admiral Nimitz said,
“The planning, operational, and technical execution of the Twentieth
Air Force aircraft mining on a scale never before attained had
accomplished phenomenal results and is a credit to all concerned.”
And as Dr. Sallagar stated in his Lessons From an Aerial Mining
Campaign:

The campaign was outstanding in many respects. More mines were
laid in five months (over 12,000) than were dropped by all the other
aircraft in the Pacific in more than two years (9,000). The
“phenomenal results” mentioned by Admiral Nimitz included at
least 70,000 (and possibly as much as 1,250,000) tons of Japanese
shipping sunk or severely damaged. Perhaps more important, much
of the surviving ship tonnage was bottled up in mined harbors for

200

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 222 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

prolonged periods while waiting for the mines to be cleared, which
led to a virtual paralysis of Japan’s essential maritime traffic.

We have gone somewhat ahead of the story. Yet, in view of the
later undeniable success of the aerial mining campaign, I must explain
my reluctance to begin an all-out campaign while I commanded the
XXI Bomber Command.

Problems Faced by XXI Bomber Command

Our new equipment presented some technical problems affecting
combat operations. I asked for three fixes which were attempted at
Wright Field but did not materialize in time to be useful. They
pertained to gunnery, weather penetration, and rescue at sea.

The gunnery equipment of the B—29 was new, formidable, and
complex. Experience in operating without fighter escort in Europe had
made defensive gunfire important. I had been instrumental in
changing the top turret of the B~29 from a two-gun, .50—caliber pair to
a set of four such guns, to meet the most dangerous of fighter
attacks—those from the front. All the guns were remotely operated
from sights placed in transparent sighting blisters. A master gunner
operated from a master-gunner’s position in a top blister from which
all the guns except the two tail guns could be controlled and fired. The
gunsights and controls were ingenious and sophisticated, but highly
complex. The sight was swiveled by the left-hand grip control, both
laterally and in height. The range of the approaching fighter was
automatically fed into the sight computer by a right-hand grip control
by which the gunner sought to keep an illuminated ring in the sight
adjusted to the wingspan of the approaching fighter. Each hand had to
work simultaneously with, but independently of, the other. To
complicate the problem further, the messages fed into the computer
were accepted in terms of “rate.” The “rate of turn” of the controls
established the velocity, rate of turn, and rate of approach of the
target. If a gunner failed to manipulate his sight smoothly and moved
with a series of jerks, these rapid jerks told the computer that the
velocity of the target was accelerating or decelerating wildly.

I asked that a device be designed to determine range and rate of

201

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 223 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

approach by radar and feed it directly into the sight computer. Such a
device was available for the tail guns which had a somewhat limited
field of fire. This would have relieved the gunner of at least half his
burden. Actually, it would have provided far more relief than that. It
certainly is far easier to do one thing at a time than to do two separate
things simultaneously.

Another fix that I desired had to do with “stationkeeping” by
radar. I worried about penetrating heavy weather fronts flying in
formation. It was essential that the formations be able to reassemble
easily after penetration of a weather front to furnish mutual protec-
tion. It was possible to use the APQ-13 bombing radar for this
purpose to a limited degree, but I was not content about it. Finally, I
asked for a floating transponder that could be tossed into the sea just
as a damaged airplane “ditched.” This would permit rescue aircraft to
home on the transponder and quickly locate the position where the
plane had gone down and, hopefully, where the crew would be rescued
from their rubber rafts.

We had tactical problems as well as technical ones. In the early
stages of operations, before we learned how to get the most from our
engines, we were seriously constrained in terms of range. To save fuel,
the first 1,000 miles or so were flown at low altitude. The climb to
penetrating altitude was begun after the airplane had become lighter
by the weight of the expended fuel.

General Arnold was understandably concerned about the large
number of losses due to “ditchings” and failures to return for
unknown reasons. I felt that losses must be expected in a highly risky
wartime operation that gave promise of being decisive. Nevertheless, I
undertook extensive measures to reduce them. The actual combat
losses were not extreme, considering the nature of the operations and
the desperate severity of the defenses. Even so, we could cut those due
to inadequate maintenance and to equipment malfunction. We simply
had to do everything within our power to overcome our deficiencies.

One measure, besides better maintenance and inspection, was
lightening of the airplane by removing items that could be spared. A
lighter aircraft had a much better chance of returning to base after
battle damage or equipment failure. We stripped the plane itself of

202

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 224 ---
EARLY OPERATIONS

1,900 pounds and removed one of the bomb-bay gas tanks for another
4,100, giving a total weight reduction of 6,000 pounds. Then, too, our
operations were still confined to narrow deviations from the direct
route to Tokyo and Nagoya. Mission after mission had to follow the
same path. Our aircraft were therefore detected upon passing Iwo
Jima (until its capture) and a few reporting ships. They gave warning
in plenty of time for the Japanese defenses to concentrate at Tokyo or
Nagoya.

The daily ““ccommand decision” whether to launch a mission the
next day and against what target hinged upon the weather forecast
more than any other factor. Our weather information came chiefly
from a nightly B—29 flight to Japan. I had a meteorological officer who
did a magnificent job under almost impossible conditions. His name
was Col. James Seaver; I had known him in England. He knew
perfectly well that my decision to “go” or to “stand down” depended
directly upon his forecast. He also knew that his estimate was going to
be better than mine, so he stated it without equivocation. He said what
he thought would be the case, without hedging it with subjunctive
clauses. Sometimes he was wrong, but more often he was right. I relied
upon him heavily and was careful never to criticize when the weather
forecast did not pan out.

The XXI Bomber Command had no special liaison unit (SLU) to
receive Ultra information—a grievous omission. I cannot understand
why. Group Captain Winterbotham in Ultra Secret drops the casual
statement:

In Brisbane (Australia) many of our main signals now came from
Delhi, but radio blackouts were frequent. Sometimes signals came
via the Australia Post Office cable, or even radio from Bletchley
(England), and Japanese weather reports came up from Melbourne
by teleprinter, so the SLU at Brisbane had a bit of a job sorting out
what was going on.

What Colonel Seaver would have given for those Japanese weather
reports! Weather over Japan was our most implacable and inscrutable
enemy. Such reports received through Ultra were of great value in the
strategic air war against Germany; they would have been priceless in

203

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 225 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

the air war against Japan. It seems simply incredible that no one “in
the know” recognized our need, especially for Japanese weather
reports, and took steps to supply me and later General LeMay with an
SLU.

204

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 226 ---
Chapter VI

Other Operations

The first B-29 bomber commander was Brig. Gen. Kenneth B.
Wolfe, who took the XX Bomber Command to India and China and
initiated operations against Japan with Operation Matterhorn. The
XX Bomber Command was formed at Marietta, Georgia, where the
B-29s were being built. General Wolfe was designated to head that
command in November 1943..A production genius and a first-class
aeronautical engineer, he literally mothered the first phases of
production and modification of the B-29. Some 2,000 changes were
made in the engine alone.

' The XX Bomber Command Headquarters later moved to Salina,
Kansas. The Second Air Force supervised its training. The 58th
Bombardment Wing, commanded by Brig. Gen. La Verne G.
“Blondie” Saunders, was the first element to reach operational status,
and the 73d Bombardment Wing under Brig. Gen. Emmett “Rosey”
O’Donnell, Jr., was scheduled to follow. On arrival in India in
preparation for operations from Calcutta and advanced bases in
Chengtu, China, the XX Bomber Command came under the jurisdic-
tion of Lt. Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell. He commanded all U.S. Army
forces in the China-Burma-India Theater until activation of the
Twentieth Air Force. First units of the XX Bomber Command arrived
in that theater during April 1944. After the XX was established there,
the command conducted a “shakedown” operation on June 5, 1944,

205

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 227 ---
BOMBS BURST AT THE KAWASAKI AIRCRAFT

PLANT—a strategic target located north of Tokyo. January 19,
1945.

206

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 228 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

against Bangkok from bases in India. On June 15 the XX launched a
night attack from bases at Chengtu, China. The target was the
Imperial Iron and Steel Works at Yawata on the Japanese home island
of Kyushu.

Meanwhile, the B-29’s mechanical and technical problems per-
sisted. So in July 1944, General Arnold finally sent for the man in
whom he had the most confidence, General Wolfe, who took over the
Materiel Command with the primary mission of expediting production
and improvements of the B-29. He was briefly succeeded at XX
Bomber Command by General Saunders, and in turn Maj. Gen. Curtis
E. LeMay replaced him on August 29. The original plans had
earmarked LeMay for the XXI Bomber Command. However, recall of
General Wolfe altered the plans, sending LeMay to head the XX
Bomber Command and giving me command of the XXI Bomber
Command, then in training in the Midwest.

When I first entered the Pacific Ocean Area, I was apprehensive
about my command relationship. It was a Navy domain, dominated by
strong-minded Navy commanders who could hardly be expected to
welcome an intruder from the Army Air Forces who was independent
of their operational control. But I got along well with the Navy
commanders, due chiefly to the broad-minded support of Fleet Adm.
Chester W. Nimitz, Commander in Chief of the Pacific Ocean Area,
and the personal attitude of the Commander, Forward Area, Vice
Adm. John H. Hoover whose flagship Curtiss was based at Saipan. I
was uncomfortable in my relations with the senior AAF generals
under Admiral Nimitz. They, quite understandably, resented this
break in the chain of command. Lt. Gen. Millard F. Harmon was the
senior AAF general in the Pacific Ocean Area and, under Admiral
Nimitz, commanded all land-based aviation in that area—Army,
Navy, and Marine Corps. He naturally wanted control of the XXI
Bomber Command too. General Arnold had sought to smooth over
the situation by appointing him Deputy Commanding General for
Administration and Logistics, Twentieth Air Force. But General
Harmon wanted full command, including operational control—or at
least inclusion in the chain of command from Arnold to me. I had
resisted this arrangement in Washington, when I was Chief of Staff of

207

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 229 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

the Twentieth Air Force, and I continued to resist it. If the Twentieth
was to exist as a unified strategic air force under the direct and
unbroken command of General Arnold, and with a primary strategic
mission, the chain of operational command from the Joint Chiefs of
Staff through Arnold to the XXI Bomber Command had to be kept
direct and uncluttered.*

Under General Harmon was another senior Army Air Forces
officer, Maj. Gen. Willis H. Hale, who commanded our land-based air
forces in the Forward Area. Whereas my relationship with General
Harmon had been tolerably agreeable, if somewhat formal, that with
Willis Hale deteriorated after a confrontation on Saipan. When the
second air base built for the 73d Wing of the XXI Bomber Command
on Saipan proved technically unsuitable for B~29 operations, I based
the entire wing at Isley Field, Saipan. I agreed to turn the other base
over to General Hale’s units since it was suitable for operations by
other types of aircraft. When I arrived on Saipan with the first B-29, I
found a half-completed base and over a hundred of General Hale’s
airplanes on Isley Field. Several times I requested Hale to clear the
field for my impending operations. He agreed to do so but failed to
move his planes. Finally, in desperation, I forced a showdown; the
situation had become intolerable and threatened to prevent our first
strike. Admiral Hoover offered to clear up the matter with a direct
order to General Hale. But I thought it would be better if two air
officers settled their problem between them. Hale moved his aircraft,
then went straight back to Washington to complain to General Arnold
about my “arrogant attitude.” General Arnold backed me up, but I
suspect the incident did me no good.

Change of Command

About mid-January 1945, a delegation from General Arnold’s
office arrived at my headquarters at Guam. Brig. Gen. Lauris “Larry”
Norstad, Twentieth Air Force Chief of Staff, bore a message from

*General Harmon respected but never really approved this arrangement. He was on his
way back to Washington to try to have it changed when his airplane was lost without a trace in
late February 1945.

208

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 230 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

Arnold: There was to be a major change in organization and
command. Combat elements of the XX Bomber Command were to be
transferred to the Marianas as soon as bases could be made available
and operations from Chengtu could be discontinued. Though I had
known of the plans for movement of the XX Bomber Command out of
China, I was not aware of its imminence. The urgency stemmed in
part from the insistence of my old friend Lt. Gen. Albert C.
Wedemeyer, USA, who had replaced General Stilwell as the new
commander of U.S. forces in the China-Burma Theater. Wedemeyer,
strongly urged by General Chennault, requested that the B-29s be
withdrawn from China as soon as possible. The XX was absorbing
supply tonnage urgently required by the Fourteenth Air Force and
other forces in China. The repeated requests were directed to the Joint
Chiefs of Staff who gave them a sympathetic ear. General Arnold
agreed.

There were other reasons for expediting the change. The XX
Bomber Command was operating under numerous disadvantages. It
expended about one-seventh of its flying hours in attacks against the
enemy and absorbed the other six-sevenths in furnishing its own
logistics, that is, transporting gasoline and bombs over the Hump from
India to the forward bases in China. Furthermore, the China-based
B-29s could not reach the most vital targets in Japan.

When General LeMay had taken over the XX Bomber Command
in India, he quite independently arrived at the same decision that
motivated me in retraining the 73d Bombardment Wing. He set about
transitioning from area night bombing to daylight precision bombing
from defensive formations. He also began lead crew training just as I
had done in the Marianas. But his logistic problems were so severe
that it was almost impossible to establish effective operations against
Japan itself. The radius of action limited strikes to the southern island
of Kyushu, Japan.

The XX Bomber Command, while headed by General Wolfe, had
attacked the Imperial Iron and Steel Works at Yawata on Kyushu in a
night raid on June 15, 1944. Only forty-seven of seventy-five B-29s
arrived over the target, and damage was not extensive. Shortage of fuel
at the advanced bases prevented the launching of another full-scale

209

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 231 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

strike for several weeks. On July 7, a force of eighteen B—29s launched
a small night raid against a number of targets in Japan, including
Sasebo, Nagasaki, Omura, and Yawata. On July 29 the XX Bomber
Command attacked the coke facilities at Anshan in Manchuria.
Twentieth Air Force had directed a daylight precision attack with at
least one hundred B-29s. In carrying out the operation, only sixty of
the Superfortresses got over Anshan, and the effects were not
satisfactory. The next operation was shifted to the oil refinery at
Palembang, in the Netherlands East Indies, from advanced bases in
Ceylon.

This attack, launched on August 10, 1944, entailed a 3,800—mile
round trip. Results, unfortunately, were poor. On the same date, the
XX Bomber Command sent a small force to attack the Nakajima
engine works on Kyushu. The night attack was unsuccessful. B—29s
struck Yawata in daylight on August 20. The losses from combat and
operational causes were heavy: 14 out of 61 B-29s. Again, the
outcome was disappointing. On August 29 the XX Bomber Command
sent 108 B—29s against Anshan, under General LeMay’s command
and with his participation. This time there was considerable damage.
The attack was repeated on September 26 in daylight using 12—plane
formations, but cloud cover obscured the target. The logistic troubles
grew so severe that the XX had to confine its operations mainly to
targets outside Japan itself. Among them were: Okayama aircraft
assembly plant on Formosa, October 14 and 16; Einansho Airdrome,
Formosa, October 17; Omura aircraft factory, Kyushu, October 25;
Rangoon, Burma, marshaling yards, November 3; Singapore Naval
Base, November 5; Omura aircraft factory, November 11 (Nanking,
China, was actually attacked because of weather at the primary
target); and Omura on November 21, in daylight. The overall
effectiveness was disappointing, caused by an intolerable logistic
situation, unfavorable weather, and early training problems with a new
and untried airplane.

On December 18 the XX Bomber Command conducted an
operation that was significant from several points of view. Prompted
by General Chennault, General Wedemeyer directed the XX to attack
a theater target: the port facilities at Hankow, China. General LeMay

210

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 232 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

objected, citing his command relationship as a part of the Twentieth
Air Force. General Wedemeyer then appealed to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, citing the provision for emergency use of the Twentieth Air
Force by the theater commander as a matter of urgency. The urgency
existed all right. The Japanese were launching a major but unsuccess-
ful drive toward the B-29 base areas. The Joint Chiefs agreed, and
General LeMay performed the mission, dropping incendiaries from
medium altitude. Eighty-four B-29s dropped more than 500 tons of
incendiaries on Hankow, setting huge fires that burned for 3 days.
General Chennault, who urged the use of incendiaries against the city,
described the attack as “the first mass fire-bomb raid” by the B-29s
and contended it was the precursor of the massive urban incendiary
attacks against Japanese cities.

By year’s end, neither the XX nor the XXI Bomber Command
had shown real results or approached the destructive power inherent
in the B—29. But in considering the future, there was a vast difference
between the XX in China and the XXI in the Mariana Islands. The
XX could never hope to reach true effectiveness, so long as it had to
fly all its fuel, bombs, and supplies over the Hump from India. The
XXI had enormous potential. Given time to perfect its tactical
performance and the growing might of the mounting accretions of new
wings, it held tremendous portent for the future. I believe that portent
could have been attained either through selective targeting or incendi-
ary urban destruction, if given time for training in bombing intelli-
gence collection and for the arrival in quantity of APQ—7 radar
bombing equipment.

Night incendiary attacks on Japanese industrial areas in 1945
were contemplated in the original plans for deploying the XXI
Bomber Command. However, such operations were to be undertaken
solely as a last resort, and only if precision bombing proved unfeasible
or failed to do the job. And the night attacks were initially scheduled
to take place after selected bombing had knocked out the Japanese
aircraft and engine factories and had destroyed the vital industrial
targets. The complication of conducting selective bombing in daylight
over targets obscured by cloud cover was expected, and the greatly
improved radar bombsight (AN/APQ-7) was rushed to completion. It

211

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 233 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

was hoped it would permit all-weather bombing of selected targets
(day or night). Since the sights were not instantly available, their use
would take time. One of the XXI’s wings, the 315th, had been
equipped with this new bombsight, allowing more accurate day or
night bombing in spite of cloud cover. The rest of the XXI’s units used
the less efficient AN/APQ-13, and they were partially trained for
radar bombing of those area targets that rendered a good radar return.

Time, however, was not on the side of the XXI’s Commander.
General Arnold wanted and demanded measurable results at once. His
judgment was heavily influenced by bomb tonnage instead of target
destruction. Actually, many more tons of bombs could be dropped at
night using radar bombing than in daylight. By day the force had to fly
in formation and operate at high altitude to defend itself against
Japanese fighters. These strictures reduced the bombload. Moreover,
the rate of opportunity for daylight operations was heavily restricted
by weather over the targets, which was very hard to forecast. Bad
weather was the rule, and cloud obstruction was about the only
weather feature that could be anticipated with any degree of assur-
ance. At the start of the campaign, target locations were hard to
determine and radar maps had not yet been prepared. Hence, the
radar bombing was not adequate to put the bombs on selected
industrial and economic targets.

In all fairness to General Arnold, he cannot be blamed for his
impatience and his inclination to measure strategic air attacks in terms
of tonnage and sorties. He was under constant pressure and criticism
from his associates on the Joint Chiefs of Staff and from higher
authority to explain what his Twentieth Air Force was accomplishing.
It is exceedingly difficult to measure and evaluate the results of
selective target bombing; in fact, we were unable to assess the real
effectiveness of such operations both in Germany and Japan until after
the war. To be sure, it is possible to report the destruction of a factory,
but it is hard to estimate that destruction in terms of depletion of
enemy industrial support for a specific set of economic or military
needs. There is always the chance the enemy has found some
substitute method of meeting those needs. It took the tremendous
efforts of the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey immediately after the war

212

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 234 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

to evaluate those effects in Europe and in Japan. On the whole, these
survey reports showed that selective targeting was far more destructive
than we thought at the time of attack.

On the other hand, statistics of tons of bombs dropped and of
sorties flown are easily compiled, seem factual and specific, and are
impressive. Photographs of burned-out cities also speak for them-
selves. And “time” had become an obsessive compulsion—the time for
invasion of Japan. Washington placed great stress on a quick end to
the war, emphasizing that this carnage must not go on a single week
longer than necessary to achieve victory. There were obvious weak-
nesses in this thought. The “‘carnage” would be enormously increased
by an invasion. Casualties on both sides would be immense. Was it
worth it? Was time itself all that important? Or were the casualties the
more momentous consideration, once victory was assured? Some of
this fixation on time mirrored the military habit of thought. And some
of it doubtlessly stemmed from restless impatience among the
American people and a desire to get this war over with and resume
normal living.

The overriding priority of targets assigned to the XXI Bomber
Command called for destruction or neutralization of the Japanese
aircraft engine and airframe factories. One of the ironies of war is that
in the early months of its operations the XXI actually did accomplish
this mission, though the results were not then apparent. Its perfor-
mance was surprisingly good, but unfortunately we could not prove it
until after the war. I am sure General Arnold did not understand what
the XXI Bomber Command had gone through or had achieved.

Since the XX Bomber Command was to be discontinued from
Chinese bases, Arnold wanted to change the command and deploy-
ment setup at once. The proposed change appealed to him as a sensible
step to greatly enhance B—29 performance, as well as to relieve the
pressure from General Wedemeyer. The China Theater Commander
was vigorously protesting to the Joint Chiefs that part of the Air
Transport Command Hump tonnage was going to the XX at a time
when he and the Fourteenth Air Force needed it all.

General LeMay, now senior to me, would take over the XXI
Bomber Command within the month. I was offered the XX Bomber

213

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 235 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Command scheduled for transfer to the Marianas; thereafter, I could
become Vice Commander under LeMay. I did not wish to accept. I
knew and respected LeMay as an able and competent bomber
commander. I did not think he needed another bomber commander as
deputy. I returned to the United States on January 20, 1945.

I was fortunate in having gifted and able associates in the
Twentieth Air Force. Brig. Gen. Roger M. Ramey, my deputy, was
not just a fine military associate but a fine friend. There were others
who filled this dual role, among them being Col. Cecil E. Combs, Col.
John B. Montgomery, and Comdr. George C. McGhee, USN. Such
associations and friendships are a priceless boon that helps compensate
for the pains and disappointments of wartime duty. Colonel Combs,
who had been my Chief of Combat Operations in Washington, became
Deputy Commander of the 58th Bombardment Wing when it arrived
at Tinian. On my urgent recommendation, Colonel Montgomery, my
Chief of Staff of the XXI Bomber Command, served General LeMay
in an important capacity. Montgomery was a fine planner and
manager, an expert pilot and navigator, and one of the best bombar-
diers in the Army Air Forces. Monty and I flew practice bomb runs
against the Japanese-occupied island of Rota, to improve my under-
standing of the bombing technique and its problems. I was glad it was
I who made out Monty’s efficiency report on bombing, not the other
way around.

Commander McGhee, a reservist, was my Navy Liaison Officer.
The Navy repeatedly offered to replace him with senior, more
experienced, regular professionals, but I resisted all offers. I knew I
had an exceptional man. George was a competent Navy officer with
interests and knowledge that covered a very broad range. I found his
judgment invaluable in discussions of many facets of our problem in
the Pacific. His responses and observations were stimulating and
perceptive. He was that priceless combination—a practical intellectu-
al. After the war, George McGhee became a member of the State
Department Policy Planning Council and later Ambassador to the
Federal Republic of Germany.

There was another military associate for whose friendship I am
especially grateful. When I assumed command of the XXI Bomber

214

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 236 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

Command I started searching for an aide. I set forth my specifications
to the Chief of Personnel. I said I wanted a young first lieutenant or
captain who was intelligent, alert, hardworking, good-humored,
tolerant, courteous, loyal, and trustworthy. Besides, he should be a
top-notch four-engine airplane pilot with enough guts to keep his
hands off the controls when I was flying. Personnel produced 2d Lt.
Ray L. Milne, who filled every one of those specifications. He was a
perfect aide so far as I was concerned, and he became a cherished
friend.

I made my decision to resist remaining with the XXI Bomber
Command as Vice Commander under the stress of surprise and
emotion. But I still think it was the proper step. I had every confidence
in General LeMay. He had been the outstanding group commander
when I headed the 1st Bombardment Wing in the early and crucial
days of the Eighth Air Force. When I returned from England to the
United States to be the Air Staff member of the Joint Plans Committee
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, LeMay stayed on, was promoted, and
became senior to me. I knew him well enough to realize he needed no
second string to his bow. He did not need a second in command, and I
would have been unhappy as a figurehead. Furthermore, it is not a
good thing to replace a commander and leave him in a subordinate
position in his own outfit.

The first three months for the B-29s in the Marianas helped lay
the groundwork for the much larger bombing offensive against Japan
during 1945. If it is conceded that initial periods are likely to be the
most difficult ones, then that of the XXI Bomber Command was
marked with reasonable success. It can not be denied, however, that
such success was accompanied by a full measure of good fortune. It
might so easily have been a period of disaster, seeing that our first
operations were from uncompleted bases. If our aircraft had returned
to find our single, partially completed runway blocked by a crippled
B-29 (or the base closed by one of those intense tropical storms that
came our way), the whole force could have been lost. All in all, I think
it was a good beginning. Its predominant pattern was woven on the
theme of selective target destruction.

215

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 237 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Operations

In November 1944, the Joint Chiefs of Staff issued a new target
priority list setting forth target systems for the XXI Bomber
Command in this priority: (1) Japanese aircraft industry, (2) Japanese
industrial areas, and (3) Japanese shipping. Our schedule of opera-
tions—all against aircraft and engine factories, except shakedown
missions against Iwo Jima—were as follows:

Tokyo November 24*
Iwo Jima December 7
Nagoya December 13 & 18
Iwo Jima December 24
Tokyo December 27
Nagoya January 5
Tokyo January 9
Nagoya January 14
Akashi January 21

Thirteen missions were flown in fifty-six days, or an average of one
every four and one-half days, counting Iwo Jima.

Seven of the ten primary targets prescribed by the Joint Chiefs of
Staff were specific aircraft and engine factories. Then an urban area
system was prescribed, followed by “shipping.” After these three top
priorities were three secondary target systems: coke, steel, and oil. It is
surprising that these vital selective target systems should have been
assigned a priority below Japanese urban industrial areas.

When I left Washington as Chief of Staff of the Twentieth Air
Force, a change in strategic policy set in. The policy I had espoused,
and which I believe was generally accepted, was in this vein:

a. Strategic Objective: To force Japan to acknowledge defeat and to
accept our terms of surrender.

b. Primary Air Strategy: To achieve the strategic objective by applying
strategic air power. More specifically:
(1) To destroy the effectiveness of the Japanese Air Force to the degree

*Three times more by December 3; an initial rate of four missions in ten days.

216

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 238 ---
JAPANESE AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY % *:

SEA OF JAPAN

1 SHIOGAMA

NUGATA

HONSHU

PACIFIC OCEAN
TSURUGA

e
NAGOVA sHimizu _ XXXXS%y
<3 rusa YOKOHAMA’ -
ty TSUSHIMA
# A pS
WAS
es
‘)
S
ro

X AIRFRAMES

@ ENGINES

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 239 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

where it should be incapable of offering a serious threat to our own bases and
forces, or of offering effective hindrance to our strategic air offensive. To
approach this objective by destroying Japanese sources of air power, using
selective targeting and precision bombing.

(2) Through precision bombing, to destroy the war-making industrial
structure of Japan by demolishing selected targets and systems vital to the
war effort.

(3) Again, through precision bombing of selected targets, to destroy and
undermine the social and economic structure of the Japanese state, by
selection and annihilation of essential structures and systems indispensable to
the organic functioning of the Japanese nation.

(4) To prepare for and, if necessary, to carry out urban incendiary
attacks as a last resort.

c. Secondary Air Strategy: To support a surface invasion of the
Japanese home islands if the air offensive failed to achieve its purpose.

I was in full agreement with this emphasis on selective targeting
and precision bombing. I had been one of the authors of this policy at
the Air Corps Tactical School. I had seen it work well in Europe and
had devised the plans for it in that theater. I believed in it. But, after I
left Washington to prepare and direct the XXI Bomber Command to
carry out this strategic concept, a switch in strategic interest became
apparent. In the communications I received from Washington, there
was repeated reference to and stress upon incendiary urban attack. I
do not know if this change was brought about by General Norstad,
General Arnold, or the Committee of Operations Analysts.

Perhaps it was General Arnold. Unknown to me, Arnold
harbored a lively interest in incendiary urban attack. On April 5, 1944,
he wrote General Spaatz about the proposed U.S. Strategic Bombing
Survey and included these remarks: “Of particular interest to me
would be some idea as to the most effective mixture of high explosives
and incendiaries against heavily built-up areas.” At any rate, the
Committee of Operations Analysts gave incendiary urban attacks a
high priority.

On December 18, the day of our first reasonably successful attack
on the aircraft facilities at Nagoya, I received a directive to launch a
full-scale incendiary attack on Nagoya. This was a blow. I had been

217

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 240 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

sweating blood in my efforts to make the 73d Wing a respectable
precision bombing outfit, with very moderate success. We were just
beginning to overcome the predilection for night area bombing, and we
were just starting to show some improvement in bombing accuracy,
both visual and radar. Now we were ordered to reverse our painfully
achieved progress in accuracy and turn to area bombing. It was no
good trying to attain real accuracy with the incendiaries. Their
imprecise ballistic characteristic precluded any accuracy in delivery
even if the sighting performance should be perfect.

Though in General Arnold’s name, the directive had been signed
by General Norstad. I protested directly to Arnold. I pointed out I
had “with great difficulty implanted the principle that our mission is
the destruction of primary targets by sustained attacks using precision
bombing methods both visual and radar.” I did not contend we had
achieved an acceptable measure of success in this attempt, but I did
assert that diversions from our determined efforts would impede a
progress that was beginning to be encouraging for the future. General
Norstad replied for General Arnold that the aircraft industry still had
overriding priority and the fire raid was “simply a special requirement
resulting from the necessity of future planning.”

Future planning? Was the switch to area urban bombing already
under way? The change to area urban incendiary attack, when it
finally came, can not be laid directly at General LeMay’s door. Its
initial support came from Twentieth Air Force Headquarters. And it
had begun with the selection of urban targets, after a revised report on
Far East economic objectives was written and issued in October 1944
by the Committee of Operations Analysts. By that time, I had
departed Washington for Saipan and was no longer in a position to
influence strategic target selection. The report listed these cities as
vital Japanese urban industrial areas to be considered for incendiary
attack: Tokyo, Yokohama, Nagoya, Kobe, Kawasaki, and Osaka.

The Committee of Operations Analysts contended that the air
offensive against Japanese urban areas would cut deeply into Japanese
war production by (1) direct physical damage to major and feeder
plants, (2) destruction of finished items and materials in process, (3)
disruption of internal transportation and services, and (4) reduction of

218

To

2

ae

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 241 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

labor efficiency. Cities were specified as preferred targets, superseding
economic and industrial systems. This list showed a sharp departure
from earlier strategy. The selected industrial “primary targets” still
contained aircraft factories. But iron and steel (to be disrupted by
attacking coke ovens) and oil (the petroleum industry) were all
dropped to “secondary targets,” below urban areas. Shipping (presum-
ably to include aerial mining) remained a top priority as it had been in
the Committee of Operations Analysts’ recommendation a year before.
However, antifriction bearings and the electronics industry had been
dropped, for reasons that I do not to this day understand. And the
electric power and rail transportation systems had not been revived
from their first rejection.

Since I had not yet accomplished my first-priority task—
destruction of Japanese aircraft and engine plants—I was not immedi-
ately affected by this change. I continued to pursue selective bombing.

Refining Pacific Strategy

On December 1, 1944, the Joint Chiefs of Staff issued a revised
memorandum describing U.S. Pacific strategy. It read:

The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff have adopted the
following as a basis for planning in the war against Japan. The
concept of operations for the main effort in the Pacific is:

A. Following the Okinawa operations to seize additional
positions to intensify the blockade and air bombardment of Japan in
order to create a situation favorable to:

B. An assault on Kyushu (Island)—in order to establish a
tactical situation favorable to:

C. The decisive invasion of the industrial heart of Japan
through the Tokyo Plain.

General Marshall was generally acknowledged to be the author and
proponent of this strategy.

Dr. Sallagar reviewed the U.S. Pacific strategy in Lessons from an
Aerial Bombing Campaign. He discovered that:

To the Army, the JCS endorsement of naval blockade and strategic

219

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 242 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

bombardment merely meant that the Navy and the Air Force
should be allowed to apply their favorite methods of warfare,
provided that these preliminary operations were used to soften up
the enemy in preparation for the invasion and did not interfere with
the major objective.

But my chief aim as Commanding General, XXI Bomber
Command, was unchanged. That is, the “intermediate objective of
overriding priority” was still the Japanese aircraft industry. Moreover,
the overall statement of military strategy for the strategic air war did
not specifically countermand the initial statement of the strategic air
objective—to destroy Japan’s capability to support the war.

In January 1945, we planned a variation from the steady stream of
air attacks on factories in the Tokyo-Nagoya area. The Kawasaki
Aircraft Industries Co., Ltd., was the third largest aircraft production
company in Japan. It had a new engine and airframe complex at
Akashi, about 12 miles west of Kobe and around 100 miles west of
Nagoya. Besides being the biggest facility of the company, Akashi was
also the headquarters of the Kawasaki engine division. There was
another engine plant at nearby Futami, approximately 8 miles west of
Akashi, and one at Takatsuki (about halfway between Kyoto and
Akashi), nearly 20 miles from Akashi. Akashi was, however, the key
installation in the engine complex. There was an additional Kawasaki
airframe plant at Kagamigahara (Gifu), just north of Nagoya. The
Akashi and Futami plants were on the coast of Harimanada, an arm of
the Inland Sea, and adjacent to prominent landmarks that showed up
well on radar. The targets, the plants of the Akashi engine and
airframe facility, were about 2 miles from the town of Akashi. The
engine plant occupied 1,287,700 square feet of productive floorspace,
and the adjacent airframe plant occupied 1,047,000 square feet. The
total target area was slightly over 3,300,000 square feet.

Kawasaki was one of the oldest and most experienced engine
manufacturers in Japan. It started under French license in 1919,
progressed through various German licenses for in-line engines, and
culminated in the Daimler-Benz design designated Ha—60 (Model 22)
of 1,150 horsepower, the Ha—40 of 1,175 horsepower, and the Ha—60
(Model 33) of 1,350 horsepower (purchased in 1937). These were used

220

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 243 ---
BRIG. GEN. HANSELL AND HIS XXI BOMBER COM-
MAND STAFF plan a mission against Tokyo. Staff members
include: (clockwise from left) Col. John B. Montgomery, General
Hansell, Col. Ralph B. Garretson, Maj. D. P. Hatch, Lt. Col.
Alan F. Adams, Col. Willard R. Shephard, Col. Seth S. Terry,
Col. Albert T. Wilson, Jr., and Lt. Col. James T. Seaver.

, Mite $ ae a

B-29 ATTACKS INFLICTED HEAVY DAMAGE on the
Kawasaki aircraft factories in January 1945.

221

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 244 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

in Tony fighters which resembled the German Me-109. The Tony
entered operational service in 1943 and at one time was the most
potent of the Japanese army’s fighters. Its service ceiling was given at
32,800 feet.

Akashi engine works also turned out Nakajima-designed air-
cooled radial engines, the Ha-35 (Model 22) and the Ha—35 (Model
32), rated at 1,100 and 1,150 horsepower respectively. They were used
in Oscar fighters. Akashi likewise produced a Mitsubishi-designed
radial of 1,970 horsepower, the Ha-45 (Model 21) used principally in
the army’s Frank fighters, Ki-84-1a, thought by many to be the best
Japanese fighter built in quantity during World War II. Bearing a
resemblance to our P-47, it was smaller and much lighter. Its service
ceiling was given at 34,450 feet.

The Akashi airframe plant made Nick, a twin-engined fighter
with day or night versions. A two-seater for defense against the B-29,
its service ceiling was put at 32,800 feet. The plant also assembled
Randy, a twin-engined, two-slot, attack fighter much like Nick but
with better performance. In both its main plants, between 1941 and
the end of the war, Kawasaki put together 8,269 airframes. Overall,
that company completed 10,274 engines during January 1941-August
1945. Kawasaki accounted for 12 percent of the combat engines
manufactured in 1944 (the industry’s peak year) and 17 percent of the
combat airframes. All in all, the Akashi complex presented a lucrative
precision target.

The mission of January 19, 1945, against the Akashi works
contained a diversionary ruse and a tactical variation. The 73d Wing
went up the well-beaten path to Nagoya, but just as it approached the
coast of Honshu, the force split. Three aircraft of the lead squadron
continued toward Nagoya and bombed Hamamatsu, southeast of
Nagoya, at high altitude—35,000 feet. It dispensed “rope” to obscure
enemy radar screens and to impart the belief the main force was bound
for Nagoya. The rest of the force (56 B-29s) turned sharply to the left
and approached Akashi. The axis of attack was selected to optimize
radar bombing of the target should it be covered with clouds. Bombing
altitude was dropped to 25,000/27,400 feet, about 5,000 feet below
previous levels. This decision was made to improve bombing accuracy.

222

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 245 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

It diminished the problem caused by very high winds and extreme
turbulence encountered above 30,000 feet and cut down on errors that
tended to be proportional to bombing height. The lower levels entailed
a calculated risk in terms of fighter opposition. I relied on the ruse to
deflect most of the enemy aircraft—which it did. And I made the first
move in a planned schedule of reducing altitude by successive steps to
enhance bombing. This was based upon the discovery that Japanese
fighter attacks, while bitter and reckless, were not as deadly against
the B-29s as German fighters had been against B-17s and B-24s. I
had intended to press this step-by-step lowering of altitude to sharpen
bombing accuracy, until we reached a level where further reduction
incurred too many losses from enemy fighters.

The January 19 mission was a magnificent success. The bombs
were dropped between 1450 and 1524 in clear weather. A total of 610
500—pound bombs were dispensed on the primary targets; 275 (45
percent) hit within the plant areas, measuring roughly 1,200 feet by
4,000 feet for the engine facility and 900 feet by 2,400 feet for the
airframe one. Every important building in the engine and airframe
complex was hit. Nearly two-thirds of the bombs struck within the
engine works. Production in both facilities dropped 90 percent and
never recovered. Eleven Japanese fighters attacked, the bombers
claiming 4 shot down. No B-29s were lost. The mission has been
depicted as one of the most perfect examples of selective bombing in
the entire war. It was among the best of which I had personal
knowledge. An important side effect of the mission was to accelerate
the dispersion of the aircraft industry—a drastic move from which it
failed to recoup.

The mission was, in my opinion, of great significance, the selected
target being virtually destroyed. But of far more consequence in the
long run, the bombing accuracy showed substantial improvement and
the bomb pattern was well concentrated. The analysis of bombing
accuracy by the 73d Wing Intelligence Section revealed that 46
percent of the bombs actually released at the primary target fell within
1,000 feet of the aiming point, giving a circular error probable of 1,030
feet. Nevertheless this analysis, based on bomb craters identified in
reconnaissance photographs, did not account for all the bombs that

223

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 246 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

were carried to the target area. A damage report prepared by the U.S.
Strategic Bombing Survey after the war painted a less favorable
picture. Forty-five percent of the bombs landed in the principal target
area, which exceeded 1,000 feet in radius.

As a broad approximation, the target area was closely equivalent
to that within a circle of 1,490 feet radius, and 45 percent hits within a
circle of that area gives a CEP of about 1,600 feet. This is not a
demonstration of good bombing accuracy from 26,000 feet by the 73d
Wing. Still, it was a marked improvement when compared with earlier
strikes, and the bombing pattern showed a sufficient close concentra-
tion to destroy all elements of the target. Further training produced an
average circular error probable of 1,250 feet, based on all bombers that
did not abort for mechanical reasons.

To be sure, the visibility was excellent and local fighter opposition
was minimal due to the successful ruse. Even so, the XXI Bomber
Command had every reason to be elated. The intensive training
program was paying off. It was clear to all, especially to the combat
crews, that the XXI could destroy selected targets when weather
conditions permitted visual bombing. It was an immense first step. The
next would be the achievement of acceptable accuracy in radar
bombing of selected targets. That, too, was on the way to attainment
later in the war. This was the last mission that I laid on as
Commanding General, XXI Bomber Command.

Since that time, I have assessed the situation in terms of the
success of selected strategic bombardment in regard to the Japanese
aircraft industry and war production industries. Using the U.S.
Strategic Bombing Survey, the extensive postwar evaluation of the air
war against Japan, I came to the conclusions set forth below.

The Japanese aircraft industry did comprise a selected strategic
target system. Initial operations against the Japanese aircraft and
engine factories were far more destructive that I judged them to be at
the time. I was highly critical of our bombing accuracy. Nonetheless,
that bombing was so devastating that the Japanese believed their
industry doomed. They took the drastic countermeasure of disman-
tling their aircraft engine and airframe industry, dispersing it, and
protecting it underground. The combined result of our destructive

224

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 247 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

bombing and the precipitate Japanese dispersal effectively realized the
purpose of the strategic air offensive against the sources of production
and supply of Japanese aircraft. Japanese aircraft production never
recovered. As Dr. Robert Frank Futrell, Air Force historian, observed
in his Ideas, Concepts, Doctrine: A History of Basic Thinking in the
United States Air Force, 1907-1964:

Actually the B-29 attacks against the Japanese aircraft factories
proved to be more effective than was realized. The U.S. Strategic
Bombing Survey would discover that the damages caused by the
B-29’s were enough to convince the Japanese of a need to disperse
their aircraft plants. The destruction inflicted, plus the confusion
resulting from frantic dispersal efforts, reduced the pre-attack
capacity of the aircraft engine plants by 75 percent, of airframe
plants by 60 percent, and of electronic and communications
equipment plants by 70 percent.

Japanese combat aircraft production peaked in 1944, before the
B-29 attacks commenced in late November. Output for the year was
21,058, an increase of 662 percent from the 3,180 built in 1941. There
were 9 producing companies. dominated by:

Percent
Nakajima 37.1
Mitsubishi 23.0
Kawasaki 14.9
followed by:
Percent
Aichi 6.9
Tachikawa _ 6.0
Total 87.9
Others 12.1
Grand Total 100.0

The primary and vital airframe and engine facilities were concentrated
in the central manufacturing districts of these areas: Tokyo-Kawasaki-
Yokohama; Nagoya; and Osaka-Kobe.

As shown in the chart, the drastic drop in actual aircraft

225

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 248 ---
LHOd3Y AYLSNGNI
NOISIAIG LAVYOUIVY

Sv6l Ainp— tyes “ver
Lavyoulv 4O
SYAGINN OGNV LHDISGM AWVdsdIV
OOIL=I76} 405 eBesoay
NOILONdOdd
Livyoulvy JO SAX30NI ATHLNOW

226

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 249 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

production began in the third quarter of 1944. This reflects the air
attacks on the Japanese aircraft industry by the XXI Bomber
Command.

Later Operations

When General LeMay assumed command of the XXI Bomber
Command, he “stood down” the groups briefly. He retained my
training program and improved the Lead Crew School. He focused on
the maintenance effort, keeping on my A-4, Col. Clarence S. Irvine,
who had worked wonders with this terribly difficult problem. After
loss of the depot at Guam, Colonel Irvine needed to improvise a
maintenance system based on the depot at Sacramento, 8,000 miles
away. He set up an air transport system of his own, and I was careful
not to ask where he got the transport aircraft or the authority to use
them. In addition, he set up a streamlined maintenance organization in
the 73d Wing by consolidating the resources of the combat and service
groups.

General LeMay retained most of my tactical methods, including
the airplane formations. This was hardly surprising since we had
worked together in the Eighth Air Force. The capture of Iwo Jima by
the Marines in February 1945 (an operation advocated by the
Twentieth Air Force in May 1944) provided an advanced air base that
was a boon to the bomber offensive. The air base was of enormous
significance from the standpoint of morale, the recovery of crippled
aircraft, and the improvement of operations in general. Damaged
B—29s returning from raids could land at Iwo Jima, and it served as a
fighter base from which escort fighters could support the Superfor-
tresses or make strafing and bombing attacks on their own. Finally,
the capture of Iwo Jima removed the Japanese early-warning station
that had been giving 2— to 3-hour warning to Japanese defenders.
From March 4, 1945—when the first crippled B-29 touched down
there—to the end of the war, 2,241 B-29s landed at Iwo Jima.
Otherwise many of these would have been lost. Iwo Jima became the
base of the VII Fighter Command.

For about six weeks, General LeMay carried forward the

227

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 250 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

operations I had started—with almost identical results. It was
apparent our preferred strategy (destruction of selected targets
through precision optical bombing) could not be sustained in the face
of the almost continuous cloud cover over Japan. Furthermore, the
APQ-7 radar was still unavailable. General |Norstad paid LeMay a
visit at the end of six weeks, bringing the expected news that General
Arnold was far from satisfied with performance. The factor of time
was taking on a new insistence. The invasion of the Japanese home
islands—whose necessity had become an obsession with the Army
planners—had been agreed upon. If air power was to end the war
without a massive bloodletting on the ground, its application could not
be delayed. A drastic reappraisal was in order. LeMay made it.

The cities of Japan were vital to the ongoing war effort. Small
factories were extremely vulnerable to incendiary attack. Although the
first priority objective (destruction of Japan’s aircraft industry) had
not been fully attained, it had been approximated. Night attack of
Japanese cities with incendiaries and radar bombing with the APQ-13
could be conducted on a consistent schedule, regardless of the
weather. Japanese air defenses against night or all-weather assaults
were minimal or nonexistent. Since it would not be necessary to
operate in formation or at high altitude, bombloads could be much
greater (up to 20,000 pounds per aircraft).|

LeMay decided to switch from chief reliance on daylight precision
bombing of selected targets to night incendiary attacks of Japanese
cities. The first incendiary attacks against six|of Japan’s greatest cities
were very effective and most impressive. The tonnage of bombs
dispensed was extremely high, losses were |very low, the rate and
frequency of operations were unconstrained by poor weather, and the
devastation of urban and industrial areas was, startling. This new type
of operations, attacking at low and medium altitudes at night,
represented a superb tactical and strategid decision, and a most
courageous and fitting one. Though it was suitable to the specific
situation and circumstances, it was not necessarily appropriate to all
requirements for the future. General LeMay recognized this. He went
on using selected targeting whenever the weather and his equipment
permitted.

228

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 251 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

These operations induced interesting reactions. The Joint Target
Group of the Joint Chiefs of Staff seized upon the new tactic with
enthusiasm. As depicted in Craven and Cate’s The Army Air Forces in
World War II:

The Joint Target Group, after studying reports of the blitz,
concluded that there were no strategic bottlenecks in the Japanese
industrial and economic systems except aircraft engine plants, but
that the enemy’s industry as a whole was vulnerable through
incendiary attacks.

Set up in the Joint Chiefs of Staff organization to recommend
Twentieth Air Force targets, the Joint Target Group began function-
ing in December 1944. The judgment on its part that “there were no
strategic bottlenecks in the Japanese industrial and economic systems
except aircraft engine plants” was wholly unwarranted, as intelligence
studies had shown and the postwar Bombing Survey was later to
prove. The Joint Target Group simply embraced a new tactic that was
easier to perform and to measure.

In order of priority, the Joint Target Group listed twenty-two of
the most vital Japanese cities from the standpoint of the important
industries they contained. Based on these recommendations, the
Twentieth Air Force on April 3 issued a new target directive. The
leading aircraft engine manufacturers, Nakajima-Musashi in Tokyo
and the Mitsubishi at Nagoya, were given top priority. Both were
selected targets. Then the directive listed six priority urban areas:
Tokyo, Kawasaki, Nagoya, and Osaka Urban Areas 1, 2, and 3. Again
quoting Craven and Cate:

The Joint Target Group based its recommendations on the assump-
tion that the principal function of air attack was to pave the way for
an invasion of the home islands. . . . But after studying the results of
the March fire raids, LeMay came to the conclusion that with
proper logistic support air power alone could force the Japanese to
surrender—a view shared privately by some members of Arnold’s
staff.

Thus, one outcome of the first urban incendiary attacks was an

229

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 252 ---
THREE LEADERS OF THE XXI BOMBER COMMAND:
Maj. Gen. Curtis E. LeMay (left), Brig. Gen. Hansell, and Brig.
Gen. Roger M. Ramey, Deputy Commander. Saipan, January

1945.
P |
° ae

ORDNANCE MEN
ON SAIPAN IS-
LAND load B-29
with incendiary
clusters. Fire raids
on Japanese cities
began in February
1945.

230

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 253 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

endorsement of this method to the near exclusion of selective
targeting. There was also another reaction. Granting the obvious
tactical advantages to single-plane night operations at relatively low
altitudes, did it follow that selective targeting should be abandoned?
Was it possible to apply these same tactics to selective precision
targets?

General LeMay was ordered to find out, and he applied himself to
the question with his customary zeal. There was every reason to
believe he would have welcomed an effective tactic to destroy selective
targets as well as urban areas. Even so, the bombing equipment on
hand was of limited capability, and his crews were ill-trained in this
technique. LeMay concluded that the APQ-13 radar was inadequate
for precision bombing. This was almost certainly true, in the absence
of good-quality radar maps and selected offset aiming points affording
good radar returns. He chose to adopt and adapt the RAF night
bombing technique that, late in the European war, had yielded
surprisingly accurate bombing results. He ran four good-sized experi-
mental missions.

On March 24, 1945, there were 251 planes of the 73d, 313th, and
314th Wings dispatched against the Mitsubishi plant at Nagoya. The
RAF pathfinder technique was employed. Ten minutes before bomb-
ing time, 10 B-29s lighted the engine works area with M-—26 flares.
Five minutes later, another 10 Superfortresses dropped M-17 incendi-
ary clusters to start marker fires. The main force then attacked with
500-pound, general purpose bombs—sighting visually with the optical
sights on the fires started by the pathfinders. Nagoya, however, was
obscured with clouds. Though 1,533 tons of bombs were dropped, the
results were negligible.

On March 30 the 314th Wing sent a small force to bomb the same
target, once more using pathfinder tactics. The bombers missed
completely, again applying visual sighting with the Norden optical
sight. On April 1 the 73d Wing dispatched 121 aircraft to strike
Nakajima-Musashi. Of the 1,019 tons of bomb dispensed, there were
just 4 hits. On the 3d of April, 3 attacks were conducted consisting of
1 wing each attacking Mitsubishi’s Shizuoka engine plant, Nakajima’s

231

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 254 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Koizumi assembly plant, and the Tachikawa engine plant. Damage in
each instance was slight.

The command was simply not equipped or sufficiently trained for
night precision bombing. Specifically, it needed target marker bombs,
such as the 1,000-pounders used by the RAF, and reflex optic
bombsights. Lacking these, General LeMay abandoned the experiment
at the time. However, with the arrival in May of the 315th Wing,
equipped with the APQ-7 radar bombing equipment, he tried again
with results that were satisfactory indeed, as described later.

When I commanded the XXI Bomber Command, I had hoped to
use aircraft equipped with the APQ-7 as lead aircraft. This would
have enabled the entire force to bomb in daylight in squadron
formations through the undercast cloud cover. And it would have let
individual aircraft fitted with the APQ—7 bomb at night. But arrival of
the 315th Wing had been delayed, and there was slight chance to test
this tactic. Interest in the continued application of selective targeting,
and the directive to try it, may well have come from Maj. Gen.
Laurence S. Kuter, General Arnold’s Assistant Chief of Staff for
Plans.

Methodically, General LeMay proceeded to destroy the urban
industrial areas that had been prescribed for him. But he did not lose
interest in selective targeting, and attacked Japanese aircraft and
engine plants whenever the weather appeared favorable. He carried
out such strikes on April 7, 12, 24, and 30; May 5 and 11; June 9, 10,
22, and 26—a total of 10 such missions in 3 months. Then he bombed
selected targets again on July 24. From April 8 to May 11, 75 percent
of the XXI Bomber Command’s effort was diverted to tactical support
of the invasion of Okinawa (Operation Iceberg), particularly to attacks
on airfields in Kyushu to suppress kamikaze operations from there.
After the B-29s were released from Iceberg, intensive incendiary
attacks on Japanese cities were resumed at once.

Incendiary Strikes

During General LeMay’s concentration on incendiary bombing of
urban industrial areas, there were 17 maximum-effort attacks entailing

232

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 255 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

6,960 B—29 sorties and 41,592 tons of bombs. Losses were 136 B—29s
or about 2 percent of the sorties. Thereafter, LeMay turned to the
smaller cities on his list, eventually assaulting and devastating a total
of 66 urban areas. The chronology of these incendiary strikes was:

May 14: Daylight incendiary attack on Nagoya, including the
Mitsubishi plant area. 529 B-29s were dispatched, 472 dropping 2,515
tons of bombs from 12,000 to 20,500 feet. 3.15 square miles burned
out.

May 16: Nagoya urban area assault at night. Of the 522 B-29s
taking part, 457 dispensed 3,609 tons of bombs. 3.82 square miles
burned out.

May 23: Night bombing of urban Tokyo. 520 of 562 B-29s
reached the target, dropping 3,646 tons of bombs from 7,800 to 15,000
feet. 17 Superfortresses were lost. 5.3 square miles burned out.

May 25: Strike against Tokyo urban area at night. 501 B-29s were
sent, 26 being lost to flak. 3,262 tons of bombs dropped. 56.3 square
miles destroyed. 50.8 percent of city burned out.

May 29: High-altitude, daylight attack on Yokohama urban area.
517 B-29s were escorted by 101 P-51s. 2,570 tons of bombs dispensed.
6.9 square miles burned out.

June 1: Osaka urban area struck in daylight by 458 of 521 B-29s
dispatched. Escort of 148 P-51s suffered heavily from violent weather.
2,788 tons of bombs released from 18,000 to 28,500 feet. 3.15 square
miles burned out.

June 5: Kobe hit in daytime by 473 of the 531 B-29s airborne.
3,077 tons of bombs dropped from 13,650 to 18,000 feet. 11
Superfortresses lost. 4.35 square miles burned out.

June 7: Day assault on Osaka by 458 B-29s with an escort of 138
P—51s. Radar bombing was from 17,900 to 23,150 feet. 2,540 tons of
bombs dispensed. 2.21 square miles burned out.

June 15: Attack on Osaka at night. 444 of the 516 B-29s dropped
3,157 tons of bombs. 1.9 square miles burned out.

The bulk of XXI Bomber Command’s operations was devoted to
urban industrial area incendiary attacks. In the entire period of its
operations, the Twentieth Air Force applied its capacity as follows:

233

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 256 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Sorties Tons of Bombs
Precision bombing attacks:

Aircraft and engine targets 2,838 14,152

Petroleum targets 1,437 10,600

Assorted industrial targets 1,459 8,093

Total 5,734 32,845

Urban industrial area attacks 21,671 138,215
Aerial mining 1,750

GRAND TOTAL 29,155 171,060

Thus, just 19 percent of the total effort in terms of both sorties and
bomb tonnage was directed against selective targets; 80 percent went
to urban incendiary attacks; and less than 1 percent to mining.

The somewhat precipitate decision of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to
move the 58th Wing from China-Burma-India Theater to the Mari-
anas had at least one ill effect. It postponed the deployment of the
315th Wing (equipped with the new AN/APQ-7 radar bombing
system) from April to June 1945. So upon the 315th’s arrival in the
Marianas, it carried out fewer than two months of operations before
the end of the war. The deployment delay, however, was put to good
use by intensifying training, particularly to perfect radar bombing
accuracy. Consequently, the 315th’s performance with the APQ-7 was
spectacular. It clearly showed that selected targets could be hit at
night or when obscured from visual bombing.

The first group of the 315th touched down at Northwest Field,
Guam, late in June. Only one runway was available, although the
other was nearing completion. Many of the base facilities were not yet
installed, for construction of the field had been seriously delayed. The
decision of the Navy Commander in Chief, Pacific Ocean Area, to
move his advanced headquarters to Guam had caused critical changes
in construction priorities there. Roads and naval facilities enjoyed a
higher priority than B—29 bases. As a matter of fact, Northwest Field
was slipped to Priority 95 on the Island of Guam. It taxed General
Harmon’s great persuasive powers to get the project moving again.

By the time the 315th Wing arrived, Lt. Gen. Barney M. Giles
was the Deputy Commander, Twentieth Air Force. General Giles

234

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 257 ---
INCENDIARY
BOMBS SHOWER
on the dock area of
Kobe, Japan, on
June 5, 1945.

SMOKE BILLOWS FROM AN INDUSTRIAL SECTION OF
YOKOHAMA, JAPAN, as B-29s continue to dump fire bombs
during a daylight raid on May 29, 1945.

235

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 258 ---
SCENES OF WIDESPREAD DESTRUCTION greeted the first
Americans arriving a Yokohama harbor three days after the
Japanese surrender on September 2, 1945.

A JAPANESE SURVIVOR AMONG THE RUINS of Yokoho-
ma, now occupied by American forces.

236

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 259 ---
KOBE, JAPAN, EXPERIENCED THE FURY OF INCENDI-
ARY ATTACKS IN JUNE 1945.

AMONG THE BURNED-OUT RUINS OF TOKYO, a survivor
drinks from a broken water pipe.

237

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 260 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

established his headquarters on Guam. He endorsed and supported
General LeMay’s decision to direct the 315th operations against a set
of selected targets comprising the Japanese oil industry. These targets
had been given in the 1942 Air War Plan (AWPD-42), and more
recently strongly recommended as a consequence of the analysis
contained in the recently completed Strategic Bombing Survey of the
European Theater. General Spaatz, who became Commander in Chief,
U.S. Army Strategic Forces in the Pacific, in mid-July 1945, strongly
supported the decision. Because the destruction of oil refining was not
specified as a top-priority objective in the current assigned target list,
LeMay described the initial attacks as shakedown training operations.

The selection of strategic bombing objectives was being argued
back and forth in the Joint Target Group in Washington. But more
and more the picking of such objectives was being evaluated in terms
of influence upon the proposed invasion of Japan. By April, however,
the Strategic Air Intelligence Section in Washington was contending
that the state of the Japanese petroleum industry was so critical that
the destruction of facilities and storage in Japan would instantly
influence the tactical situation. So the position of Generals Giles and
LeMay had considerable backing. This fine decision by General
LeMay afforded the opportunity to test again the feasibility of all-
weather attack on selected targets by radar bombing, and at the same
time to contribute substantially to the conduct of the war.

Between June 26 and the end of the war on August 14, the 315th
Wing flew fifteen night missions against oil refineries or synthetic
plants in Japan. These missions are listed below:

Mission
Date Number Target

June 26/27 1 Utsube Oil Refinery at Yokkaichi
June 29/30 2 Nippon Oil Company at Kudamatsu
July 2/3 3 Maruzen Oil Company at Shimotsu
July 6/7 4 Maruzen Oil Company at

Shimotsu (Repeat)
July 9/10 5 Utsube Oil Refinery at

Yokkaichi (Repeat)
July 12/13 6 Mitsubishi Oil Company at

238

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 261 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

Kawasaki

July 15/16 7 Nippon Oil Company at
Kudamatsu (Repeat)

July 19/20 8 Nippon Oil Company at Kansai

July 22/23 9 Imperial Fuel Industry Company
at Ube

July 25/26 10 Mitsubishi Oil Company at
Kawasaki

July 28/29 11 Toa Fuel Company at Smimotsu

August 1/2 12 Mitsubishi Oil Company at
Kawasaki (Repeat)

August 5/6 13 Imperial Fuel Industry Company

at Ube (Repeat)
August 9/10 14 Nippon Oil Company at

Kansai (Repeat)
August 14/15 15 Nippon Oil Company at

Tsuchizaki (near Akita)

The missions were conducted by streams of single aircraft at
night, bombing from 15,000 feet. The initial bombloads averaged
14,631 pounds per airplane but, with experience, this grew to 20,684
pounds. Only 4 planes were lost and 66 damaged in the entire
campaign. The 315th Wing launched its first mission on the night of
June 26/27, under the command of Brig. Gen. Frank A. Armstrong,
Jr., who had been one of my wing commanders in the Ist Bombard-
ment Division of the Eighth Air Force. Two groups attacked the
Utsube Oil Refinery at Yokkaichi which was producing aviation
gasoline. The mission was only partly effective.

The second mission was flown against the Nippon Oil Company
at Kudamatsu on the night of June 29/30. This oil refinery was on the
coast, west-southwest of Kure. Of the thirty-six aircraft airborne,
thirty-two bombed the primary target. No B—29s were lost. The attack
was but moderately successful, so the target was hit again on Mission
No. 7 during the night of July 15/16, using seventy-one aircraft of
which fifty-nine bombed the primary target. Again there were no
losses. The cumulative results of both missions were damaging indeed.

On the night of July 2/3, Mission No. 3 struck the Maruzen Oil
Company at Shimotsu (located on the coast, south-southwest of

239

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 262 ---
THIS OIL REFINERY IN THE TOKYO AREA was a key
target during the final five months of the war against Japan.

~T OTT nett ta seeee ker seewveneeeo WE REIN Wal aABaIIDL vapall.

ALL THAT REMAINS OF THE POWER AND GENERA-
TOR PLANT at the Imperial Fuel Industry Company at Ube,
after the bombing attacks of July and August 1945.

240

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 263 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

Osaka). Because the attack was not a complete success, the target was
hit again on the night of July 6/7 by Mission No. 4. This time the
outcome was superb as the mission reports attested:

Target: MARUZEN Refinery

Located immediately north of Shimotsu and 7 mi South-
Southwest of Wakayama. The Plant produced aviation gasoline,
lube oil, ordinary gasoline and fuel oil. It had extensive storage
facilities. Crude capacity was 5000 barrels per day.

On Mission No. 3, 40 aircraft were airborne. 30 dropped 297
tons of general purpose 500 Ib. bombs on the primary target (95.7
percent of the bombs which were airborne).

On Mission No. 4, 60 aircraft were airborne. 59 bombed the
primary with 441 tons of 500 lb. general purpose bombs (98.2
percent of bombs which were airborne).

Damage from Mission No. 3 was just moderate, but photographs from
Mission No. 4 disclosed that ninety-five percent of the installation was
damaged. Only five large tanks and several small ones were left
standing.

General LeMay, who never extended unearned praise, sent this
message after photo reconnaissance and interpretation of pictures
confirmed the mission report:

I have just reviewed the post-strike photography of your strike on
target 1764, the MARUZEN Oil Refinery at Shimotsu, the night of
6/7 July. With a half-Wing effort you achieved ninety-five percent
destruction, definitely establishing the ability of your crews with the
APQ-7 to hit and destroy precision targets, operating individually
at night. This performance is the most successful radar bombing of
the Command to date. Congratulations to you and your men.

On the night of July 28/29, Mission No. 11 demonstrated the high
degree of accuracy obtainable with the AN/APQ-7 Eagle radar
bombing equipment. The target was the Toa Fuel Company at
Shimotsu. Extracts from the mission report revealed:

An important refinery of crude petroleum with large and
modern facilities and good shipping and rail connections, the target

241

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 264 ---
Sv6i ‘2/9 Aine 30 14BIN

‘O93 110 NOddiIN

3HL JO AYSNIA3SY 1O N3ZNYYW
“ONIM SINO”E 4ISIE — % ON NOISSIW

ayy K
yaouv i;

Sy WW SOLE ONG ie SWIHSOHIH

agom
VAODVWN

NV390 91dIDVd

Nvdvfr dO VAS

ALINISIA OGNV NVdvr

242

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 265 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

also had a tank capacity of about 600,000 barrels. It was roughly
the shape of an equilateral triangle about 2,500 feet along each side.
The storage area extended 1,000 feet beyond the northern top of the
refinery area.

84 aircraft were airborne and 78 bombed the primary target,
dropping 658.3 tons of 500 pound GP bombs. Opposition was light
and there were no aircraft losses or crew member casualties.

Photos showed it was unnecessary to return to the refinery for
in this one mission the target was almost completely destroyed.
927,000 barrels of the 1,245,000 barrel storage capacity was
damaged while the 1,274,000 cubic foot gasometer capacity was
almost completely destroyed. 69 percent of the 210,254 square foot
group area was destroyed. The target was thoroughly saturated with
bombs and obliterated beyond repair.

The target photo and interpretation showed the following distri-
bution of bombing effort and impact of aircraft salvos:

Number of Aircraft Percentage of Aircraft

Bombing Primary Dispatched Bombing
Group Target Primary Target
16th 20 95
331st 13 93
501st 16 100
502d 15 _91
Total 64 96

Centers of impact of 80 percent of salvos were identified in the
photographs. Of these, 78 percent were in the target circle of
1,000-foot radius; 7 percent were over the target circle of 1,000—foot
radius; and 15 percent were short of the target circle of 1,000-foot
radius. Thus, 96 percent of aircraft dispatched bombed the primary
target; 80 percent of the salvo centers were identified; and 78 percent
of those identified were within 1,000 feet of the aiming point. This
meant that 60 percent of the bombers dispatched placed their salvo
centers within 1,000 feet of the aiming point, giving an average
circular error probable of about 850 feet for salvo centers. This was an
astonishing degree of accuracy for bombing at night from 15,000 feet
through an undercast. It was actually much better than the average

243

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 266 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

CEP bombing distribution of XXI Bomber Command for visual
daylight formation bombing (1,250 feet), though this was conducted at
much higher altitude. Of course, one mission does not establish a CEP
that can be taken as a reliable basis for forecasting and planning.
Unfortunately, the other mission reports of the 315th Wing did not
contain bomb plots.

The final mission of the 315th, flown on the night of August 14/
15, was also remarkable. The mission report stated:

TARGET: NIPPON OIL COMPANY
REFINERY AT TSUCHIZAKI NEAR AKITA

This target was attacked on the 15th and last mission flown by
the Wing, flown on the night of 14-15 August 1945 with bombs
released only a few hours before the announcement by President
Truman that the Japanese had accepted the United States terms.

The mission was the longest nonstop combat flight ever made,
a distance of 3,740 statute miles from base at Guam to the target on
the northern coast of Honshu island and return.

Postponed for several days by the peace negotiations, the
mission took off, led by the Wing Commander (Brig Gen Frank
Armstrong) at 1637 hours on 14 August. 143 aircraft were airborne
and 134 dropped 953.9 tons of 100 pound and 250 pound GP bombs
on the primary.

Results of photo-interpretation brought now familiar words:
“Almost completely destroyed or damaged.” Photographs disclosed
that no portion of the target was untouched. The three refining
units were a tangled mass of wreckage, the main power plant still
standing but seriously hit. More than 66 percent of the tank
capacity was destroyed. Lesser installations, including the worker’s
barracks, were destroyed.

Note: This mission was conducted by the Twentieth Air
Force, after redesignation of the XXI Bomber Command,
under the command of Lt. Gen. Nathan F. Twining.

[The figure for bomb size in the report is probably in error; it should
have been 1,000-pound GP bombs rather than 100-pound GP
bombs as reported.]

The operations of the 315th Wing showed conclusively that it was
feasible to destroy selected targets by radar bombing when the target

244

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 267 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

location was well known and the radar returns of the target itself were
clear or its location relative to a prominent radar feature was well
known. As suggested earlier, B-29s with AN/APQ-7 radar systems
might have been used as lead aircraft for daylight selective bombing by
formations of the other B-29s. This technique would have permitted
employment of the entire force for daylight attack of selected targets
even if those targets were obscured by clouds.

Effects of the Air Offensive

The U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey was able to report the effects
of strategic bombing on the Japanese aircraft and engine target system,
the aerial mining campaign, and attacks against selected targets in the
iron, steel, and petroleum industries. On the other hand, it had trouble
reporting the results of strategic bombing on Japanese war production
and upon Japan’s war economy, because no related system of targets
was set up by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Twentieth Air Force as
selective priority strategic targets. Nevertheless, the Bombing Survey
submitted reports on a number of war production industries.

The Report on Japanese War Production Industries set forth the
objectives of our strategic air force:

1. To bring about an overwhelming and immediate drop in
war production.

2. To shut off output of certain specific high priority items of
war production.

3. To accelerate the rate of the existing decline of overall war
production.

4. To force a substantial cut in production of those military
supplies of such high priority that they would otherwise withstand
the effects of the current restrictive economic forces.

All four of these objectives were met to some degree. Strategic
bombing did hasten and intensify the decline in war production, and
prevented the Japanese from saving the production of high-priority
items from the general decline. The report did not say from whence
the objectives were derived; probably they were deduced from various

245

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 268 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

statements by military leaders and from mission directives and orders.
It chose to consider Japanese “war production” as comprising six
categories: aircraft industry; army ordnance; naval ordnance; naval
shipbuilding; merchant shipbuilding; and the motor vehicle industry.
Of these, only the aircraft industry was subjected to selective air
attack.

The effects of the strategic air offensive were catastrophic in the
aggregate. They stemmed from a series of interacting results of air
bombardment: direct damage from bombing; indirect results of
bombing reflected in frantic efforts to disperse industry; loss of basic
raw materials through blockade, including aerial mining; and absen-
teeism of workers whose homes had been destroyed and who had to
forage for food and the essentials of life for themselves and their
families.

The report gave this analysis of the selective bombing of the
aircraft industry:

No figures are available for loss of production due to physical
destruction of plant, machinery, and equipment. Loss of production
capacity through unsuccessful attempts at dispersal (which resulted
from fear induced by the early attack on airframe and engine plants)

was:
Airframes 33 percent
Engines 57 percent
Propellers 42 percent

About 55 percent of the whole aircraft industry’s facilities were out of
production due to dispersal alone.

For other categories of war production, the overall drop in
production capacity through physical destruction of plant, machinery,
and equipment was:

Army ordnance 26 percent
Naval ordnance 28 percent
Merchant and naval ships 10-15 percent
Motor vehicles negligible

246

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 269 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

The decline in production capacity due to unsuccessful attempts
at dispersal (induced by the threat of bombing) was:

Army ordnance 12 percent

Naval ordnance 12 percent

Merchant and naval ships small

Motor vehicles sufficient to bring
a complete
collapse of
production

The loss of production capacity by bombing was brought about by
a combination of heavy urban area attacks and a relatively small
amount of bombing (24,000 tons or 17 percent of total bomb tonnage)
directed at selected targets. Strategic bombing alone did not reduce
Japanese production. Loss of raw materials from shipping losses and
blockade had an impact as well, especially in the case of steel. The
report pointed out that:

The loss through ships sunk of 17 percent of all Army supplies
shipped overseas (including food, clothing, fuel, and construction
materials as well as ordnance) in 1943; 30 percent in 1944; and 50
percent in 1945 shows that increased production alone would not
have been sufficient to provide adequate supplies for the Japanese
Army overseas.

The report summed up its findings on the effect of strategic
bombing of Japanese war industry production in these terms:

There was a 53 percent decline in war production between
September 1944 (just prior to the launching of the air offensive) and
July 1945—the last full month of production before the end of the
war. The magnitude of the decline in output of each of the major
categories of war production from peak levels to the July 1945 level
is shown below:

Category Percentage drop from
peak production

Aircraft 57

Army Ordnance 34

247

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 270 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Naval Ordnance 56
Merchant ships 82
Naval ships 53
Motor vehicles 96

There can be no doubt that the air offensive crippled Japanese war
industries, even though only one of them (aircraft) was selected for
direct attack. And the urban area incendiary attacks indirectly
crippled other industry.

The Bombing Survey recognized another basic Army Air Forces
strategic objective—one that had been clearly defined in AWPD-1
and AWPD-42, though it had been submerged by other considera-
tions in later plans. This objective was not only to destroy the war-
supporting structure, but the economic framework on which the
Japanese state depended. The combination was meant to bring about
surrender, when it became apparent to the Japanese they could no
longer supply the basic needs upon which the population relied for its
life and social survival.

The U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey issued a report on the effects
of strategic bombing on Japan’s war economy. It concluded:

By July 1945 Japan’s economic system had been shattered.
Production of civilian goods was below the level of subsistence.
Munitions output had been curtailed to less than half the war-time
peak, a level that could not support sustained military operations
against our opposing forces. The economic basis of Japanese
resistance had been destroyed. This economic decay resulted from
the sea-air blockade of the Japanese home islands and direct
bombing attacks on industrial and urban-area targets.

The urban-area incendiary raids had profound repercussions
on civilian morale and Japan’s will to stay in the war. Sixty-six
cities, virtually all those of economic significance, were subjected to
bombing raids and suffered destruction ranging from 25 to 90
percent. Almost 50 percent of the area of these cities were leveled.
The area raids interrupted the normal processes of city life to an
extent that interfered seriously with such production as the
shrinking raw material base still permitted.

The bombing offensive was the major factor which secured
agreement to unconditional surrender without an invasion of the

248

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 271 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

home islands—an invasion that would have cost hundreds of
thousands of American lives. The demonstrated strength of the
United States in the B-29 attacks contrasted with Japan’s lack of
adequate defense made clear to the Japanese people and to the
government the futility of further resistance. This was reinforced by
the evident deterioration of the Japanese economy and the impact it
was having on a large segment of the population. The atomic bomb
and Russia’s entry into the war speeded the process of surrender
already realized as the only possible outcome.

The effectiveness of strategic air attack was limited by the
concepts of its mission. Had the purpose of strategic air attack been
primarily to force an independent decision rather than to support a
ground-force invasion in November 1945, there would have been no
occasion to attack oil, tetraethyllead, arsenals, or, after March,
aircraft. Efforts could have been concentrated against food and fuel
supply by attacks on internal transportation and against urban
areas, thus striking solely at the main elements upon which
continued Japanese resistance was based. Moreover, a part of the
bombing effort merely duplicated results already achieved by
blockade. Attack on the rail transportation system would have
secured full coordination with the blockade program. The railroads
were overburdened, defenseless, and had only limited ability to
replace rolling stock or major installations.

The testimony was overwhelming that the air offensive against
Japan—essentially an anti-Japanese Air Force operation followed by
an urban-area strategy—was a magnificent success. The conclusion
that the bombing effort should have been concentrated upon aircraft
and engine production, transportation, and urban areas alone is
interesting, significant, and worthy of further evaluation.

Debate over Grand Strategy in the Pacific

As the time for the Potsdam Conference drew near, President
Harry S. Truman asked that the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Service
Secretaries meet with him to discuss Pacific strategy before his
meeting with Prime Minister Churchill and Marshal Stalin. The Joint
Chiefs immediately asked theater commanders for their views on
strategy to defeat Japan.

General MacArthur had previously advocated invasion of Hon-

249

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 272 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

shu at the plain of Tokyo. He had stipulated that Russia must be
induced to enter the war, so as to tie down the million-and-a-half
Japanese soldiers believed to be in Manchuria. Without this provision,
MacArthur advised against direct invasion of the Japanese home
islands. In a staff report of March 8, 1945, he was quoted as saying he
was in complete agreement with the Army that the sole means of
defeating Japan was by invading the industrial heart of Japan. (There
is a striking parallel here. Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower had stated with
regard to Germany that it was necessary to conquer the Ruhr, the
industrial heart of Germany. Neither Eisenhower nor MacArthur
seemed to understand that the heart of a great nation can be stilled by
strategic air operations, as well as by occupation by troops.) General
MacArthur believed Russia would demand and get Manchuria, but
thought she should pay for it by joining in the fight against Japan. He
was quoted as saying that he understood the Navy still favored a plan
whereby Japan would be surrounded with air and naval bases, and
eventually blockaded and bombed into submission. MacArthur con-
tended that this would never succeed.

On April 20, 1945, General MacArthur analyzed the strategic
problem under three possibilities:

Course 1. Encircle Japan by further expansion to the westward,
deploying maximum air forces preparatory to attacks on Kyushu
and Honshu in succession or directly against Honshu.

Course 2. Encircle Japan by further expansion to the westward
with a view to its complete isolation, and endeavor to bomb Japan
into submission without effecting landings in the homeland.

Course 3. Attack Kyushu and install air forces to cover a
decisive assault on Honshu.

He dismissed Course | as time-consuming and diversionary away from
the decisive area—the plain of Tokyo. Turning down Course 2 as time-
consuming and ineffective, he said:

It assumes success of air power alone to conquer a people in spite of
its demonstrated failure in Europe, where Germany was subjected
to more intensive bombardment than can be brought to bear against
Japan, and where all the available resources in ground troops of the

250

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 273 ---
: ok t 4 :
: qnZii : e
> 6B Bae : ¢
a £5 § = o 5
“% *, a2 z x! 5
° , we
\ -
oF oot E83 2 IN, 3 *% 88
NEY 8 fo ky’
? { “4 3
SW pug é - | fad
2 ¢ a, ¢
5 : ig “. i - r
8 a2 3 5 a 2 8
3 o \ z
\
\ a:
N z of
x PES
s ( 3 yy \. Y 2
= S REQ 3
ge Y . | A\ \ °
pegasus bes if = S \ \ > W\

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 274 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

United States, the United Kingdom and Russia had to be commit-
ted in order to force a decision.

He recommended Course 3.

In calling his conference with the Joint Chiefs for June 18, the
President stressed the cost of invasion in terms of casualties. He
wanted to know the time needed and the losses that would ensue from
an effort to defeat Japan by isolation, blockade, and bombardment by
sea and air forces. He asked General Marshall for his views. Marshall
said he personally believed the operation against Kyushu was the only
course tu pursue. He felt air power alone was insufficient to put the
Japanese out of the war, adding that it was unable alone to put the
Germans out. General Eaker was present, representing General
Arnold who was in Guam at XXI Bomber Command Headquarters.
Arnold had been reached, and he asserted that bombing could end the
war. Still, he instructed Eaker to support General Marshall’s position.

General Arnold later divulged his reasons for favoring the
invasion of Kyushu. He held, with General LeMay, that Japan was
already tottering and air power would complete the collapse. But
capture of Kyushu would afford certain benefits—areas for basing
forty groups in an additional air force. These groups, chiefly equipped
with B—17s, would be close to targets in Honshu. The air units were
actually available for transfer to the Pacific. And the capture of
Kyushu would make it unnecessary to invade Honshu. Besides, this
policy position would be an expression of loyalty to General Marshall.
The latter had stood “in loco parentis” behind the birth and growth of
the Army Air Forces, and had given evidence of supporting a separate
Air Force, coequal with the Army and Navy after the war. General
Arnold knew, as did the other Chiefs, that Japan had already started
peace negotiations through the Russians in Moscow, who deliberately
failed to forward the peace feelers. Admiral King concurred with
General Marshall.

Admiral Leahy, however, voiced considerable concern over
casualties and seemed to favor blockade and bombardment. He asked
General Marshall what the casualty rates had been in the other Pacific
invasions and how many troops would it take to invade Kyushu.

251

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 275 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Marshall said the plan for invading Kyushu called for 766,700 men.
Admiral Leahy said the Okinawa casualties (34,000 Army, 7,000
Navy) constituted about 35 percent of the the force. If this yardstick
was applied to Kyushu, the casualties would be numerous indeed
(268,000). Admiral King thought the casualty rate would be some-
where between that on Luzon and that on Okinawa. Admiral Leahy
went on to question the insistence on unconditional surrender,
asserting that lesser terms would still allow our absolute control of
Japan. The President finally accepted General Marshall’s views, and
the target date for invading Kyushu was set at November 1.

On his trip to the Pacific, General Arnold had viewed the scene
firsthand from the Command Headquarters in Guam. He was
impressed with the devastation already visited upon Japan and with
the immense air power that was in place. He also saw the mounting
strength of the Eighth Air Force, one wing of which was established in
Okinawa and the rest in transit from Europe and the United States.
Then, too, Arnold received a preliminary report of the Bombing
Survey’s findings on the effect of the strategic war against Germany. It
was a staggering testimonial of the impact of strategic air warfare on a
modern state at war. General Arnold was quoted at the time: “If we
could win the war by bombing, it would be unnecessary for the ground
troops to make a landing on the shores of Japan. Personally I was
convinced it would be done. I did not believe Japan could stand the
punishment from the air that Germany had taken.” Arnold sent
General LeMay back to Washington to brief the Joint Chiefs and, if
they concurred, the Secretary of War and the President. LeMay had
arrived too late. The President had already agreed to the policy of
invasion and the machinery had been set in motion, not only for the
invasion of Kyushu but for the subsequent invasions of Honshu.

At the Potsdam Conference, President Truman learned of the
successful test of the “atomic device.” He queried his advisors and top
commanders about using it. They agreed to its use, with one
exception—General Arnold, the man whose aircraft would deliver it.
Arnold, just back from the Pacific, questioned the need to drop the
atomic bomb to assure Japan’s defeat without an invasion. Japan had
already been weakened by blockade and beaten to her knees by air

252

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 276 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

bombardment. In August, September, and October the Twentieth and
Eighth Air Forces could double the total tonnage dropped on Japan to
date. That should be sufficient to force surrender, since Japan was on
the verge of collapse. However, if it became a question of dropping the
atomic bomb or launching an invasion, he favored the bomb. Other
considerations clinched his conviction that the bomb should be
dropped. He later strongly supported the decision to use atomic
weapons.

In anticipation of the President’s decision to use the atomic bomb,
potential targets had been selected. On orders from General Arnold,
Col. Cecil E. Combs, Twentieth Air Force Deputy for Operations, had
set aside four cities not yet bombed and passed the word to LeMay
that they were not to be attacked. These were Hiroshima, Nagasaki,
Kokura, and Niigata.

Second Change of Command

With Victory in Europe in May 1945, the second phase of global
grand strategy was put in motion. Forces released from combat in
Europe were transferred to the Pacific and preparations were made for
the final offensive against Japan. On July 16, 1945, a major
reorganization of the air forces in the Pacific took place. General
Arnold turned to the strategic air team that had been so successful in
the air war against the Third Reich. Gen. Carl Spaatz, Commander in
Chief, U.S. Strategic Air Forces in Europe, was chosen to command
the strategic air assault against Japan. His new designation was
Commander in Chief, U.S. Army Strategic Air Forces in the Pacific,
headquartered on Guam. He reported directly to General Arnold, who
would continue to command the strategic air forces from Washington,
as executive agent of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The Fifteenth Air Force in the Mediterranean was demobilized,
but its Commanding General, Lt. Gen. Nathan F. Twining, was sent
to the Pacific as a member of Spaatz’s winning team. He would take
command of the Twentieth Air Force with headquarters in Guam.
The veteran Eighth Air Force, under the other member of the
command team, Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle, would be returned to the

253

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 277 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

United States, reequipped and trained with B—29s, and moved to
Okinawa. The old XX Bomber Command Headquarters would be
absorbed in the new Eighth Air Force Headquarters. The XXI
Bomber Command would be reconstituted as the Twentieth Air
Force. Again there was an awkward problem. General Arnold sent for
General Twining and told him there was going to be a reorganization
of the entire command structure in the Pacific: “I want Spaatz and
Doolittle and you to take over right away. Now get on with it.”

General LeMay was relieved as Commanding General, XXI
Bomber Command, and General Twining assumed command of
Twentieth Air Force. (Through oversight or neglect, General Arnold
failed to acquaint LeMay with the decision he had reached, so it
remained for Twining to answer LeMay’s query on his arrival, “What
are you doing here?” Perhaps Arnold had expected Spaatz to notify
LeMay.)

General Twining’s comment upon heading what had been the
XXI Bomber Command and was now to be the Twentieth Air Force
was typical—and appropriate. He said, “Taking over this outfit from
Curt LeMay is about like taking over the Notre Dame football team
from Knute Rockne.” Fortunately, General LeMay’s broad experience
and proven talents were saved for continued application in the
strategic air war. General Spaatz made him his Chief of Staff—a role
that would keep him active in the final phase of the strategic air war
against Japan. Lt. Gen. Barney M. Giles became General Spaatz’s
deputy.

General Twining had barely settled into his new command when
he received orders to deliver the atomic bombs. Twining literally
possessed no knowledge of the atomic bomb, for as Fifteenth Air
Force Commander he had been deeply engrossed in mounting
maximum-effort combat missions in Europe. After a supersecret
briefing, he saw no need to waste time in questioning the judgment of
his superiors.

The Finale

During the course of the war, the Twentieth Air Force flew

254

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 278 ---
G Ya ‘ er
° -

$n

£ ALEUTIAN ISLANDS

USSR

PACIFIC WAR THEATER |

JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
YELLOW SEA wy PACIFIC STRATEGY
g March 1944

v5
Aig,
OC *9
Nn

"Waray iy
INDIA * © ANDs
5m 77 Change meg . ° 6

“vrpar PAS RUsr * |

15 June 1944

\
BAY OF BENGAL

MARIANAS ¢ |S
s.

15 Sept

Bases  =NiweTok
oy .

Ronn
Davao
rT 5) CAROLINE ISLANDS ‘ .
° £ cweeer is
LD ¢'2 15 April 1944 .

HOLLANDIA ew? .
ANY NEW RELAND
TNX GEN 5. .
) SOLOMON IS. we
NEW a
BRITAIN

cunoarcana SR,

. “Aas, °s KWASALEIN
Truk @ °° ° ee ig .

BORNEO
Indies

ate

Py fS
INDIAN OCEAN oS ae

AUSTRALIA.

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 279 ---
dno (91WOZY) a1ISOdWOD UIGOS.

(9V6L Asenage 4 ul

yiBuas |jNy 40y Pajnpeyss) eMeuUlAHO Wend ewir OM| wens wens ueiUul uedieg = uesuly wens uel,
odeq puewwos aouesieuuode yy

BUIAA BUIM BUM BUIM ay 4014614 BUuIM BUuIM BulM BulM Bulm o1ydes6o010Ud a >ye)

4a yBig 62-4 6¢-98 UISLE wens HA WSLE uIVLe YWELEe PACs 4uisg Pag 41604

| eereeen Seen

(av) 99404 417 dV dv AV
e040 JI U8 yjenueMm ui yluerag =: YF UaATIIYL
9|1;009 BuyuM peayerluM SUUM =—- UAWUSLINAA

AWE 3483S $0 $2149

| seos04 diy 1se9g wey
sayid Aindag T
Bel UBB9O IIJIDEd—-INID sedog tiv o1Bered1g AWwYy Sh Rasy I14!9Bd ISBMYINOS—ONID
ZLIWIN zzeeds anyywyoew

4dAVLS 4O SASIHO LNIOF SN

GvG6L isnbny GL JO SV
d1d1IDVd AHL NI SADHOS YIV DISALVYLS AWYV SN

31d!DVd JHL NI SA9DYHO4 YIV AWHYV SN

255

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 280 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

31,387 bomber sorties; 3,058 of which were flown by the XX Bomber
Command, 28,329 by the XXI. The war had taken 414 B—29s, 80 from
the XX Bomber Command and 334 from the XXI. Losses on combat
missions averaged 1.3 percent of sorties airborne, with a total of 147
bombers lost. Of these combat losses:

50 percent were caused by enemy fighters.
36 percent were caused by enemy antiaircraft.
13 percent were caused by a combination of
both.

1 percent were self-inflicted by accident.

Fighter losses were 80. By the end of the war the Twentieth Air Force
comprised:

Bombers B-29 1,042
Fighters P-47 733
P-51 349

Night 18

Reconnaissance F-7 26
F-13 52

Staff and Transports 93
2,313

The total inventory of B-29s on hand in the Army Air Forces was
about 3,700.

On the basis of photo coverage, intelligence estimated that 175
square miles of urban area in 66 cities were wiped out. Total civilian
casualties stemming directly from the urban attacks were estimated at
330,000 killed, 476,000 injured, and 9,200,000 rendered homeless.
There were 2,210,000 houses demolished or burned down and another
90,000 were partially damaged. This bombing “dehoused” 50.3
percent of the 1940 population of these cities. A total of 159,862 tons
of bombs was dropped. Japanese casualties resulting from the strategic
air attack, from all causes, was estimated at 900,000 deaths and
1,300,000 injured. Following are a few quotes from Japanese sources
on the effectiveness of American air power:

256

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 281 ---
OTHER OPERATIONS

“If I were to give you one factor as the leading one that led to
your victory, I would give you the Air Force.”

Admiral Asami Nayano

Imperial Japanese Navy

Chief of Naval Staff and Supreme
Naval Advisory to the Emperor

“If I were to give you the decisive factors in the war in the order
of their importance, I would place first the Air Force.”

Vice Admiral Shigeru Fukudome
Imperial Japanese Navy
Chief of Staff, Combined Fleet

“The determination to make peace was the prolonged bombing by
the B-29s.”

Prince Fumimaro Konoye
Premier of Japan

Japan accepted defeat while still possessing over 2.5 million
combat-equipped troops and 9,000 airplanes capable of being equipped
and flown as kamikazes. No Allied troops were present on the soil of
the Japanese home islands when Japan surrendered.

257

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 282 ---
A FLIGHT OF B-29s, by John McCoy. (Courtesy USAF Art
Collection)

258

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 283 ---
Chapter VII

Summing Up

There are many dangers associated with passing judgment on the
strategic offensive against the Axis in World War II. In the first place,
those of us who participated in the plans and operations are
undoubtedly biased in our views, because we are appraising our own
efforts.

Secondly, even after forty years and a vast amount of research and
writing by many people, there are still gaps in available knowledge.
Critical judgments on the diversion of forces and effort away from the
agreed-upon grand strategy and objectives may fail to give proper
weight to the imperative of tactical urgency, as well as to the pressures
for changes in strategy from the highest political levels. Nor is it
possible to reconstruct the confusion, obscurity, and ignorance which
attend all military operations in war.

Finally, it is easy to be misled into underestimating the most
implacable of all our enemies—the ever-present bad weather. Many
tons of bombs that were dumped on “other” targets may represent the
bombing of secondary targets when the cloud cover at primary ones
was heavier than predicted. The degree to which this diminished the
efficiency of the various strategic air offensives will, of necessity,
remain a matter of speculation. Judgment of operational capability
affected selection of vital target systems, particularly since this was a
new art in warfare. Moreover, selections were sometimes made by

259

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 284 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

civilian industrialists whose judgment of industrial effect was highly
respected, but who should not have been expected to judge military
capability to destroy or paralyze. To cite one example, the Committee
of Operations Analysts dropped German electric power from first to
thirteenth priority, not because it was not vital, but because they
considered its paralysis to be beyond military capability. The relatively
small amount of bomb tonnage needed to destroy the German electric
power system was actually available and could have been applied.

The Strategic Air War against Germany

A distinguished body of modern historians has reached critical
and adverse conclusions about the bomber offensive in Europe. In
public places it has been openly proclaimed that the offensive was
ineffective, inefficient, and wasteful. No doubt it was more ineffective,
inefficient, and wasteful than it need have been. The U.S. Strategic
Bombing Survey noted that the strategic air offensive could, in some
instances, have been better applied. But as both a careful student and a
participant, it seems patently clear to me that the Combined Bomber
Offensive was a stunning success.

It provided the sine qua non for the invasion of Western Europe.
It achieved its intermediate objective of overriding importance,
“elimination of effective air opposition.” It paved the way for the
landings over the beaches and for the breakout from the beachhead. It
destroyed the sources of fuel production on which all elements of the
Wehrmacht depended. And it succeeded in delaying the arrival of
enemy forces in the crucial few days after D-day.

After the invasion and breakout from Normandy, strategic air
warfare provided a major contribution to victory in the subsequent
combined operations on the Continent. It was a full partner with air-
supported ground operations in bringing Germany to defeat. One of
the most powerful nations in modern history was rendered impotent
by air power. The viability of the economic system of Germany was
destroyed. In the words of the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey: “It was
decisive.”

Given the actual development of escort fighters, it also seems

260

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 285 ---
SUMMING UP

certain that any of the three strategic air plans (AWPD-1, AWPD-42,
and the CBO) could have been carried out as planned. And the
Combined Bomber Offensive could have included the destruction of
most of the German powerplants and the disruption of the power
distribution system by demolishing the switching stations. Further, it
appears to me that the U:S. strategic air forces should not have been
dismembered by sending forty percent of the aircraft to the Mediterra-
nean to be used chiefly for theater objectives. The air power could
have been better used to destroy and disrupt the electric power system.
Coupled to this would be the collapse of the synthetic petroleum
system, the loss of nitrogen for explosives, and disruption of the
German transportation system. Altogether, they would have produced
in May or June of 1944 the chaos which characterized the German
war industry and the German state in January, February, and March
of 1945.

I also feel it would have been possible to achieve this fatal chaos
before the Normandy Invasion. The greatest single deterrent to this
achievement was probably the decision to invade North Africa, and
later to extend military operations the length of the Mediterranean,
including Italy. This was, of course, a political decision. Even during a
war, one can not quarrel with the right of political leaders to base
major decisions on political rather than military factors. The action
was quite within the bounds of American political philosophy. The
U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff had their day in court, expressing with
candor and vigor their opposition to this Mediterranean strategy. They
contended it was a dangerous diversion from the main military
objective—the defeat of Germany. President Roosevelt made it clear
he understood the military reasoning of his professional military
advisors. But he had other elements to deal with as well. Thus, the
right of the President and Prime Minister Churchill to override the
advice of the U.S. Joint Chiefs and reach a political decision, and the
propriety of their action in this case, are beyond question. The
decision’s outcome must be evaluated in terms of political accomplish-
ments. Its effect on military achievements and other political goals
should likewise be weighed.

From the military point of view, the decision confirmed the dire

261

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 286 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

predictions of the U.S. military advisers. The Mediterranean Theater
absorbed enormous resources and energies and drew the Allies into an
area of conflict unlikely to make a timely and maximum contribution
toward military victory over the principal enemy. This diversion of
effort and the attendant critical delay of the main offensive were felt
most acutely in the prosecution of the air offensive against Germany.
In particular, the decision to invade Italy following the conquest of
Sicily entailed a massive, time-consuming, and costly campaign that
sapped the energies of the available heavy bombers in support.
Ultimately, the strategic air bases in the vicinity of Foggia, Italy, were
significant assets in the strategic air offensive. Even so, they were not
appreciably better situated than those in Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica
would have been. There was sufficient base capacity there and in
England to accommodate the entire strategic air forces. This delay and
diversion were most unfortunate in terms of their preventing the “fatal
weakening” of Germany before the Normandy Invasion and adding to
the invasion’s subsequent cost.

Had the Allied heads of government stood steadfast in support of
the plans (chiefly the air plans) they had initially accepted, the
strategic air offensive against the vitals of Germany could have been
mounted earlier and in greater force. Major air strikes on the
Luftwaffe fighter component began in February 1944 after at least a
four-month delay. Equal air forces had been on hand in October 1943
but forty percent of them were in the Mediterranean, not under a
common strategic air force commander. Had Big Week begun in
October, with all available bombers operating under unified command,
there could have been six months of air assault and the fatal
weakening of Germany prior to the invasion. The collapse of Nazi
Germany’s industrial and economic heart and the loss of munitions
support for its armed forces, which occurred in January 1945, could
have been brought about before the invasion.

Despite the delays and the dilution of the strategic air offensive
against Germany itself, there is good reason to believe that the “fatal
weakening” could still have been produced previous to the invasion, if
General Eisenhower and his staff had been willing to accept the urgent
recommendations of the strategic air force commanders. The Com-

262

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 287 ---
SUMMING UP

bined Chiefs of Staff should not have yielded complete control of the
strategic air forces for six months, even in the face of Eisenhower’s
open threat to resign his command.

In short, the heads of State and the Combined Chiefs of Staff
could have supported their decision at Casablanca with the same
determination and unwavering persistence of bomber and fighter
crews flying to their objectives. The Committee of Operations
Analysts could have confined themselves to listing industrial targets in
Germany in order of their effect on the state and its war-making
capacity, without speculating on operation feasibility. The Supreme
Commander, Allied Expeditionary Forces, could have understood the
advantages the strategic air offensive could have brought to him. Had
they done these things, the final invasion and land operations would
certainly have been far less bloody and less costly. The invasion might
have been a major mopping-up and occupation operation.

In summary, the greatest U.S. contribution to the strategic
concept of air warfare and its practical application was made by Col.
Harold L. George. The idea was first developed by George and his
associates at the Air Corps Tactical School. Under his guidance as
Chief of the Air War Plans Division, the concept was translated into
sound strategic plans for employment of U.S. air power. This was done
in the face of strong opposition from proponents of surface warfare.
The concept envisioned undermining of the enemy’s will and his
capacity to wage war, by bombing selected industrial, economic, and
military systems. The most persuasive testimony of the soundness of
Colonel George’s precepts was their passing the crucial test of the
world’s first great air war. The result was a Germany in chaos, bereft
at last of the power to subjugate the free people of Europe.

The Strategic Air War against Japan

Further proof of the precepts of strategic air power lay in the
assault on Japan. The defeat of that nation and its surrender were
without invasion and with military forces still intact. Devastated and
its will broken, Japan could not wage war nor protect its people.
Unquestionably the Japanese could have continued to resist, killing

263

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 288 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

thousands of invading Americans and losing thousands of their own.
But the potency of the air offensive convinced the Japanese that
defense against it was impossible and resistance futile. Even more
important, I believe Japan could have been defeated without wide-
spread urban destruction.

The decision to switch to urban incendiary attacks was not
necessarily faulty. Persistent cloud cover frustrated efforts to destroy
selected targets by optical bombsighting. And the delay in acquiring
AN/APQ-7 radar sights would simply have fortified the claims of
those who saw invasion as the only reliable option for the defeat of
Japan. Moreover, Japanese structures and cities were uniquely vulner-
able to incendiary attack. There may have been factors bearing on the
decision of which I am unaware. But given the circumstances as they
existed, including a dedication to grand strategy based on invasion, I
consider the decision to launch incendiary attacks on Japanese cities
quite sound. The effects were decisive.

The fault was with the grand strategy. Invasion should not have
been regarded as the sine qua non of victory. There was an intense
concern with “time,” caused by the arbitrary selection of a November
1945 invasion date. Still, there should have been no limitation on
strategic operations dictated by the shortage of time. Time was on our
side. With every day that passed, the combination of sea blockade,
aerial mining, and strategic bombing was bringing Japan nearer to
inevitable disaster.

The question of whether grand strategy should have been changed
is to a degree academic and pointless. Certainly the Army Air Forces
could not have changed it alone. There is, however, another very
significant point. The turn to incendiary area attacks and the
devastating atomic bombs did not in themselves prove that selective
strategic bombing should be abandoned elsewhere or under other
circumstances. Selective bombing was decisive against Germany and
could have been decisive against Japan. Improvements in weapons and
sighting techniques have multiplied the effectiveness of conventional
weapons attack perhaps a hundredfold, surmounting the limitations
imposed by “our most implacable enemy,” the weather. Technology is
opening a path toward defense against nuclear missiles. Such a defense

264

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 289 ---
SUMMING UP

of our military capabilities and most particularly of our urban
centers—the focus of our “national will”—offers promise of inhibiting
nuclear war. If such a condition transpires—and it is crucially
important to the American nation that it should transpire—then wars
of the future may again be determined by accurate delivery of non-
nuclear weapons against properly selected targets. Then selective
destruction by strategic air forces with conventional weapons may
once more be the instrument for “fatal weakening” of a great
industrial power and the arbiter that hastens the peace agreement. It is
an option we should furnish ourselves.

Ten years before this climactic assault on Japan, I proposed at the
Air Corps Tactical School three basic functions for employing armed
forces in support of national purpose and national policy. These were
(1) the forceful acquisition of enemy territory, either for permanent
acquisition or in order to control the enemy nation and its capability
to resist; (2) the application of compelling force, without acquisition of
enemy territory or the intent permanently to acquire, in order to
destroy or paralyze his capability to wage effective warfare and to
sustain the “will to resist” of the enemy people; and (3) the provision
of defenses which will sustain our own capability to fight and to
bolster the will of our people to endure and persist. This framework
still has merit for evaluating military requirements and alternatives in
support of national purpose.

Invasion of the Japanese home islands was not an imperative
requirement. Reviewing the principles and precepts on which
AWPD-1 and AWPD-42 rested, it is quite apparent that, in the case
of Japan, invasion was merely a form of compelling and not an end in
itself. We did not want to hold Japanese territory permanently. If this
had been our aim, invasion would have been a must. The Japanese
would not have surrendered even after the atomic bombings, had our
purpose been to dismember their nation. What we wanted was to
prevent the Japanese expansion, strip Japan of its conquests, and
remove the menace of Japanese aggression from the Pacific basin. We
needed to exert a compelling force to this end, and it could be imposed
by sea blockade and air bombardment as well as by invasion. To be
sure, temporary occupation by ground forces would be needed while

265

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 290 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

civil order was reestablished under favorable terms. But forceful
invasion was just one of several alternatives. Nor was “unconditional
surrender” vital to our war aims.

The destruction of the cities and the enormous loss of Japanese
civilian lives were in no sense an objective of the United States
Government or of the strategic air offensive. They were means toward
achieving the ultimate goal—capitulation of the Japanese Govern-
ment. The wholesale destruction of the Japanese cities entailed an
unwelcome reconstruction burden after the war, and the excessive loss
of life could not be compensated for at all. An alternative would have
clearly been preferable, but it would have required the capability to
destroy targets in any type of weather. We achieved this capability at
the close of the conventional-weapons air war against Japan.

Whether to drop the atomic bomb caused much soul searching.
Preparing for the Allied meeting at Potsdam, President Truman asked
his chief advisors (military, political, and scientific) if they favored
dropping the bomb.

But the problem was more subtle than first appeared. It was not
confined to the morality of killing Japanese civilians with a single
weapon; it also embraced the potential loss of half a million or more
American lives and perhaps ten times that many Japanese lives
(civilian and military) through invasion and subsequent battles in
Japan. The atomic bomb was needed both to convince the Japanese
that further resistance was futile, and to convince the American army
that invasion was unnecessary. The result would be a tremendous
saving in Japanese and American lives. The “bomb” may not have
been needed to bring defeat to Japan, but it was needed to save the
Army from its obsession with a costly invasion. And the bomb’s
demonstrated power would be required after the war to deter Russian
domination of Europe.

As for Japan, the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey stated:

The Bombing offensive was the major factor which secured
agreement to unconditional surrender without an invasion of the
home islands—an invasion that would have cost hundreds of
thousands of American lives. The demonstrated strength of the

266

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 291 ---
SUMMING UP

United States in the B-29 attacks contrasted with Japan’s lack of
adequate defense made clear to the Japanese people and to the
government the futility of further resistance. This was reinforced by
the evident deterioration of the Japanese economy and the impact it
was having on a large segment of the population. The atomic bombs
and Russian entry into the war speeded the process of surrender
already realized as the only possible outcome.

It seems clear that, even without the atomic bombing attacks,
air supremacy over Japan could have exerted sufficient pressure to
bring about unconditional surrender and obviate the need for
invasion. Based on a detailed investigation of all the facts, and
supported by the testimony of surviving Japanese leaders involved,
it is this Survey’s opinion that certainly prior to 1 December 1945,
and in all probability prior to 1 November 1945, Japan would have
surrendered even if the atomic bomb had not been dropped, even if
Russia had not entered the war, and even if no invasion had been
planned or contemplated.

An Alternative Grand Strategy for World War II

The strategic air offensives against Germany and Japan, carried
out in the context of the Allied grand strategy, were magnificent and
decisive accomplishments. But, as is always true in history, other
courses of action could have been pursued. A different grand strategy
might have been equally decisive and perhaps more efficient. One such
alternate overall grand strategy for conducting World War II might
have had these broad dimensions:

First Phase

I. Strategic offensive against Hitler’s Germany, with:

(1) A sustained and unremitting air offensive against the
sources of German military, economic, and social strength through
selective bombing of:

(a) The German aircraft engine industry.

(b) The German electric power system.

(c) The German transportation systems.

(d) The German oil and chemical industries.

(e) The German antifriction bearing industries—coupled
with air combat to defeat the German fighter forces.

267

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 292 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

(2) Provision for (a) invasion of the Continent after completion
of the strategic air offensive (if invasion should then be necessary), and
subsequent defeat of German ground forces, or (b) occupation of
Germany if the air offensive caused collapse of military power or
produced surrender.

II. Initial defensive operations in the Pacific with minimum
diversion of resources from the air war against Germany, and to curb
the expansion of the Japanese aggression and provide adequate
surveillance measures to prevent surprise attack.

Priority allocation of resources to forces engaged in the
European war.

Second Phase

As soon as victory in Europe could be assured, development of
forces for the war against Japan and initiation of such military
operations for regaining or securing essential base areas as could be
undertaken without impairing the success in Europe, coupled with
intensive sea operations against Japanese shipping and the Japanese
navy.

Third Phase

On defeat of Hitler, reallocation of priorities and transfer of
resources to the Pacific for the defeat of Japan, primarily by sea
blockade and selective air bombardment, more specifically to complete
such of the following as had not been accomplished in phase two:

(1) Principal thrust across the Central Pacific to defeat sea forces
and to capture the Marianas, Guam, Okinawa, and Iwo Jima as air
bases for the strategic air offensive; the capture of sea bases essential to
effective prosecution of a sea blockade and control of essential sea
areas. Japanese forces overseas to be cut off from the home islands and
left to die or surrender for lack of sustenance.

(2) Conduct of an effective sea blockade of the Japanese home
islands, including sinking or capture of Japanese ships.

(3) Conduct of an effective strategic air war to bring about the
collapse of Japanese resistance and to undermine the civil and social

268

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 293 ---
SUMMING UP

structure through selective air attack, using both visual and APQ-7
radar techniques against:

(a) The Japanese Air Force, through destruction of the
Japanese aircraft engine and airframe industry.

(b) The Japanese electric power system, primarily through
destruction of thermal power plants and switching and transformer
stations in the power transmission system serving the principal
industrial areas.

(c) The Japanese transportation systems, including Japanese
sea transportation (accomplished through aerial mining of home
waters, and air attack of shipbuilding and repair facilities and ports),
and the principal railroads, which were meager in capacity and very
vital and vulnerable.

(d) Japanese steel industry, through destruction of coke ovens.

(e) Petroleum storage and refineries.

(f) The Japanese food resources by destruction of fertilizer
chemicals.

(4) Preparation for:
(a) Incendiary attack of Japanese urban areas, if this became
necessary to bring about capitulation of the crippled nation.
(b) Atomic attack of Japanese urban areas, if necessary.
(c) Occupation, if Japan surrendered.
(d) Invasion if all else failed.

Secondary effort: operations in the Southwest Pacific to recapture the
Philippines, isolate large bodies of Japanese troops, and impose heavy
casualties.

This proposed air strategy for Japan bears an interesting resem-
blance to that of AWPD-1 for Europe. Both proposals stemmed from
the basic concepts developed at the Air Corps Tactical School.

Any serious consideration of this speculation, and any derivation
of lessons must take into account these circumstances in which the war
was fought:

(1) Security of the American homeland. The United States was in

269

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 294 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

no danger at any time. There was no threat to the American people
and no external leverage directed against the civil will to resist. The
primary limiting factor at home was domestic impatience. The
industrial machine was intact and unhampered.

(2) We had time to build and react. Our Allies in Europe held the
enemy at bay while we armed.

(3) There were major drains on the German economy. The
Germans were fighting a major war on the Eastern Front. The
efficiency of the U.S. strategic air offensive was conditioned by the
strain inflicted upon German industry by the war with Russia, and
later by large-scale operations in Western Europe and the Mediterra-
nean. But presumably this pressure on Germany would have contin-
ued, even without the American and British invasion of Normandy.
And the decisive effectiveness of the air offensive did not depend on
the Normandy Invasion.

(4) Japan was an island nation with insufficient resources at home
to support the war and to maintain its population. This significantly
enhanced the efficacy of the strategic air offensive. Furthermore,
Japan’s highly flammable cities were very vulnerable to incendiary
attack.

Finally, in considering the results of our incendiary attacks versus
selective bombing, we must recognize a most unwelcome but nonethe-
less real concurrent effect. Incendiary destruction of great cities has
had a powerful and redundant impact upon the United States Air
Force. Forgetting the compelling effectiveness of selective bombing
against Germany, Americans remember only the slaughter of a million
civilians in Japanese cities. A most grievous outcome of our abandon-
ing traditional “‘selective target” bombing for incendiary destruction of
sixty-six Japanese cities was a deep and pervasive revulsion among the
American people against strategic bombing of all sorts. This reaction
was more powerful and debilitating to the Air Force than the
cumulative efforts of the German and Japanese air forces.

Should civilian reaction be permitted to cripple the United States
Air Force by shackling the strategic air offensive completely—whether
or not it is dedicated to selective bombing? If so, it may deny to the

270

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 295 ---
SUMMING UP

United States its most effective means of compelling by force in just
causes. Actually, if we are denied the efficient application of strategic
selective bombing, we will have no means of exerting strategic power
whatever, short of massive nuclear exchange. To avoid this crippling,
the American public must be better informed on the power and
efficiency of conventional weapons, and on selective bombing as a
decisive factor in winning wars. Selective target bombing in World
War II proved to be the best way to destroy the war-making
capabilities of a modern industrialized nation. And it is likely to be far
less inhumane than the mass killings on the battlefields, or the
vengeful actions of an invading army against helpless civilians in cities.
Selective bombing with conventional bombs and other weapons is now
many times more effective than it was in the Second World War.

Postscript: Forty Years Later

As I reflect back, later, on the only two great strategic air wars the
United States has ever fought, many lessons emerge that can be
applied to our ever-present need for security. The principles and
concepts underlying the American doctrine of selective strategic air
warfare bore up remarkably well in the cauldron of World War II. The
devastation of Germany and Japan in 1945 testified eloquently to the
power of the strategic air strike force, even before the dropping of the
atomic bombs. Germany reached economic and industrial collapse
while her borders were still intact. Japan surrendered without a single
American soldier on her home soil. Among the strategic precepts
confirmed by experience are:

(1) Modern great nations are dependent upon industrialized
systems for the prosecution of war and for the sustenance of the civil
structure. Destruction or crippling of those vital systems through
correct strategic. targeting can lead to national collapse.

(2) Conventional bombs and warheads can destroy any manmade
structure or system. New weapon-delivery systems have improved
accuracy so markedly as to multiply the destructiveness of convention-
al weapons manyfold.

271

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 296 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

(3) The air strike force did deliver such weapons with adequate
accuracy, without incurring intolerable aircraft losses or causing
excessive civilian casualties.

(4) Area attack of urban areas is an effective last-resort measure.

(5) Defense of the source of power—our people—is essential
before an efficient air offensive can be launched or sustained.

(6) Bolstering the national will through defenses is also necessary
to prevent collapse of national resolution in crisis. Wars can be lost
without fighting at all.

Few will question the first two precepts in terms of World War II,
or in regard to present and future applications. As to the third, new
conditions must be examined. Air power has basically two limiting
factors: the “will of the people” and of their civilian political leaders to
apply air power, and the capability to penetrate enemy defenses
without intolerable losses.

Limitation stemming from a lack of will on the part of the people
and their civilian political leaders is something new to us. That civilian
“will” has never before been subjected to danger and threat from a
foreign foe. Since the Civil War in the 1860s, our citizens have been
safe and secure at home. Civilians suffered because of the loss of
friends and relatives, but they were themselves quite safe and secure. A
new element confronts Americans now—national fear.

Fear can bring military defeat by causing our civilian leaders to
curb the power of military forces to deal vigorously with an enemy.
This is not new. Britain had to swallow the humiliation of Munich
because her cities were vulnerable to air attack and her air defenses
were not yet ready. Political fear inhibited all effective action by the
French military forces in 1939, when the opportunity to act vigorously
was ripe. The delay bred of fear led to the defeat and humiliation of
France. Whether this outcome was preferable to the casualties that
might have ensued from prompt military victory, only Frenchmen can
judge.

The same fears restrained British military action early in the war,
and much of that inhibition came across the channel from France. It
took that vigorous and courageous political leader, Winston Churchill,

272

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 297 ---
SUMMING UP

to guide the British people in facing up to danger. But even here the
great British politician could not have prevailed, had not he and a
handful of others provided for a belated but effective air defense
system for British cities.

After the war, there was a period of panic in Europe as our Allies
realized they were powerless to oppose the massive Russian armies
camped in East Germany and poised for a thrust through Western
Europe. The new North Atlantic Treaty organization (NATO) set
goals of 200 divisions, then 150, then 100, and finally 80, as each
country defaulted its required contribution. Finally in desperation and
with reluctance, NATO turned to American air power to save it from
domination by Russian armies or the fear of Russian aggression. The
solution, based on enormous U.S. nuclear superiority and relative
safety of American cities, worked admirably for 2 decades until the
Russians developed a powerful atomic threat of their own. During
these 20 years, the threat of U.S. atomic air power repeatedly
frustrated Russian threats on Berlin. But the growth of Russian
strategic atomic power has eroded our initial great advantage.

Since then we, too, have felt the debilitating hand of political fear.
In Vietnam we would not let our military leaders operate efficiently
against North Vietnam until very late in the struggle. We feared
escalation would bring in Soviet or Chinese forces. Bombing of
selected targets in Hanoi and Haiphong ultimately produced prompt
results at the peace table. By then we were weary of the struggle and
were settling for withdrawal of our troops and recovery of our
prisoners of war. We were not directly afraid of the North Vietnamese.
We feared that their sponsor, the Soviet Union, would openly enter the
war and perhaps escalate it to an international nuclear exchange.

Our fear may or may not have been well founded. Military
strategists discounted the likelihood of Soviet nuclear escalation, since
we had a huge nuclear superiority in the early days of the war in
Vietnam. Civilian leaders, however, took quite a different view. Their
fear may well have been the telling factor that shaped our destiny then.
It may do so in the future. Soviet nuclear power is very real indeed
today and our cities are defenseless. Our allies in Europe are
confronted with a double fear—Soviet nuclear power and enormous

273

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 298 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Soviet conventional power. There probably is no sure and certainly no
easy solution. But one requirement stands clearly on the horizon: If we
intend to support our rights and aspirations abroad and fulfill our
pledges and obligations, we must have the offensive power to compel
by our military forces, especially our air forces. We must also have a
defense for our cities which can bolster our will and preserve our
industry and heritage. Both are needed to give credibility to deterrence
against direct attack of the United States, and against imposition of
political and economic hegemony over important allies and trading
partners. These conditions constitute a great change from the national
security we enjoyed in World War II. The strategic air offensive
proved decisive in that war. But before it can be used again, we must
find a way to create for ourselves the security at home that was our
legacy then.

Fortunately, new technology offers fresh hope for devising a
system of antimissile defense for our country, and the President has
called for a major effort to develop that technology into an effective
system. It is the sine qua non of American military capability and will
to support our national goals.

274

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 299 ---
Appendix*

The German Electric Power Complex
as a Target System

As stated earlier, initially the German electric power system had
been adequate to its demands. There was sufficient capability to permit
boilers and turbine-generators to be shut down periodically for
maintenance. But, by 1939, the peacetime demands were putting great
strain on the capacity of the system, and with the outbreak of war the
demands rose rapidly. Power was rationed first with regard to civilian
non-war use. But as the demands for munitions rose, the entire reserve
capacity was absorbed, and still it was necessary to ration vital
industries. By 1944 many vital industries were rationed at thirty
percent below their needs.

It became impossible to allow “stand down” for maintenance and
this also began to be felt. Power availability fell considerably below
normal “plate” capacity.

Little effort had been made to increase the power capacity at the
outset of the war, since the war was expected to be of short duration.
But in 1941 an attempt was made to build ten large new plants. None
of them was completed prior to the end of the war. However, existing
plants were expanded on the following scale:

*Haywood S. Hansell, Jr., The Air Plan that Defeated Hitler (Atlanta, Ga., 1972), pp
286-297. In some instances, author has revised the figures in this appendix.

275

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 300 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

1942 900,000 additional KW
1943 850,000 additional KW
1944 875,000 additional KW

Since the total theoretical installed capacity came to 22,000,000
KW in 1944, of which the actual peak extraction was about 16,000,000
KW, this increase in existing plant capacity was small and was hardly
felt. Of the theoretical installed capacity of 22,000,000 KW,
13,300,000 KW was incorporated in the national integrated system.
The remainder was either in large factory plants, in the national
railway system, or in a large number of small installations which were
not included in the generally available power pool.

Of the 13,000,000 KW theoretical capacity of the integrated
system,

79% was in coal burning plants.
21% was in the hydroelectric power plants.

About twenty percent of the entire generating capacity was
established in the industrial area around Leipzig. Another twenty
percent was established in the Ruhr. The hydroelectric plants,
comprising another twenty percent, were in southwest Germany.

The distribution of the more important electrical power stations
came from some ninety-five power generating stations:

Over 200,000 KW 5
100,000 to 200,000 KW 40
50,000 to 100,000 KW 50

95

The total number of large stations was 45. Their capacity was a
total of 8,000,000 KW, or nearly two-thirds of the capacity of the
installed integrated systems.

This complex, vital, and over-stressed system was operated under
the constant control and supervision of the National Load Dispatcher
in Berlin, who in turn operated through twelve District Load
Dispatchers, each having a major switching system.

Actually the maximum peak capacity that ever flowed through
the system rated at 13,000,000 KW was 9,700,000 KW. Thus the 45
plants with a theoretical capacity of 8,000,000 KW constituted the

276

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 301 ---
APPENDIX

great majority of power which was in such urgent demand by
industry.

The integrated “grid” which was the cause of such concern to the
Committee of Operations Analysts and the air planners turned out to
be far less flexible than they had believed. The report of the USSBS
says ““A statement by the National Load Dispatcher discloses that the
capacity of the transmission system was such as to permit an exchange
between adjacent districts, of approximately 10 percent of the larger
district’s capacity.” Thus the system was much less flexible than we
had thought.

The report has the following to say about transmission systems:

The ability to use electric power transmitted over a transmis-
sion line depends upon rather severe limits of receiving-end voltage.
Any voltage variation beyond the band of 90 percent and 110
percent of normal leads to damage of connected utilization equip-
ment. At some value between 80 and 85 percent of normal voltage,
the whole transmission system becomes unstable and will suddenly
collapse with coincident wide-spread damage to utilization equip-
ment.

When generating facilities are lost, the transmission system
capacity drops at the same time because of the loss of synchronous
equipment in the generating stations (turbo-generators), which was
the terminal equipment of the transmission system. Destruction of
generating facilities, therefore, has a two-fold effect: the direct loss
of generating capacity of the area, and the simultaneous reduction
of transmission line capacity into the area.

An integrated system contains a complex array of voltage
regulators and relays and circuit breakers and switches intended to
prevent and arrest damage which may be caused by sudden increases
of load and sudden drops in capacity and voltage. These control
complexes and safety devices are limited in the degree to which they
can accommodate sudden major changes in load and voltage.

The complexes are usually integral with or immediately adjacent
to the powerhouses, as are the large transformers.

The Bombing Survey concluded that all evidence indicates that
the destruction of power generating and switching installations would

277

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 302 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

have had a catastrophic effect on Germany’s war production. The
survey might have added that it would have had a catastrophic effect
on Germany’s civilian economy and social structure as well.

Was the destruction and disruption of the German Electric Power
System within the capacity of the available strategic air forces? More
specifically:

(a) Could the disruption of the German electric power system
have been accomplished in addition to the other operations actually
carried out before the invasion, with the forces actually made
available?

(b) Could the disruption of the German electric power system
have been carried out in addition to the other priority objectives of the
CBO, shortly after the invasion?

(c) Would the disruption of the German electric power system in
addition to the other primary objectives, have “fatally weakened” the
German ability to support the war and thus have brought the German
state to collapse at an earlier time?

What size force was required to destroy and disrupt the German
electric power system?

Computation of bomber force requirements to assure destruction
and collapse of the German electric power system can now be made on
the basis of actual war experience, and involves consideration of a
number of steps.

1. What is the number of generating plants and switching
stations that would have to be put out of operation?

Dr. Carl, a German electric power engineer, submitted a report to
the German National Load Dispatcher describing the targets whose
destruction would bring about collapse of the system. His report was
dated February 23, 1944.

He considered that the U.S. and British strategic air forces would
be apt to attack a few transformer points between districts, such as
Braieweiler and Kelsterbach sub stations. “After putting this inter-
district grid out of operation, the intra-district power supply could be
paralyzed by individual attacks on 56 of the most important generat-

278

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 303 ---
APPENDIX

ing stations whereby two-thirds of the entire German power produc-
tion could be eliminated.”

Another German study lists nine transformer stations and forty-
one generating stations.*

For the purpose of this analysis, the target systems will be taken at
fifty-six generating stations and nine transformer and switching sub
stations.

2. What number of hits and size bombs would be required to
knock out an electric power generating station?

The typical thermal electric power station in Germany had its
most vulnerable and vital elements housed in a power house about 400
feet by 500 feet in dimensions. The entire complex, including
transformers, switchgear, condensers, pumps, and other equipment
occupied an area of about 25 acres, or an area about 1000 feet by 1000
feet.

All the facilities were vulnerable to heavy high explosive bombs,
which should have delay fuses. Five hundred-pound bombs or larger
were found to be adequate to cause irreparable damage. Since no
spares for heavy equipment were available, the restoration of operation
would have to await manufacture of replacement equipment.

After examining twenty-five generating stations which had been
damaged by air attack, the Electric Utilities Report of the U.S.
Strategic Bombing Survey had this to say:

. . from the foregoing it can readily be seen that an electric
generating station or a switching and transformer station is a highly
integrated mechanism, each unit playing a vital part in the
functioning of the plant as a whole.

The layout in all cases covers a large area, is easily traced by
transmission lines, and is easily recognized from the air. It has been
demonstrated to be exceedingly vulnerable to air attack, and even a
chance hit may be so damaging as to close down a plant completely.
From the standpoint of generating station engineers and operating

*USSBS German Electric Utilities subcommittee report.

279

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 304 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

men, the vulnerability of a generating plant to air attack in wartime
is a continued nightmare.

The recuperability of a generating station to a major failure
even in normal times is slow. No two plants are alike, and often the
individual pieces of equipment are specially designed to meet a
given set of conditions. The possibility of maintaining adequate
Spares to cover contingencies in such ‘custom-made’ plants does not
exist.

As indicated earlier, examination of these plants which had
received damage incidental to attack on adjacent targets led the
USSBS to conclude that .2 tons of bombs per acre would put a plant
out of commission for several months, and .4 tons of bombs per acre
would put a plant out of commission for a period lasting from 6 to 18
months,

Since a powerhouse proper averaged about four acres in extent,
this would require two hits with 1100-pound bombs to put the station
out of commission for several months, and 3 hits with 1100-pound
bombs to knock it out for 6 to 18 months.

The entire area of the generating complex, covering 25 acres, or
an area of 1000 feet by 1000 feet, should receive 10 tons of bombs or 20
hits with 1100-pound bombs to knock it out for 6 to 18 months.

3. What size force is required to knock out a generating station,
as determined by actual bombing accuracy and prevailing tactics?

In computing requirements to knock out a generating plant, the
current bombing tactics employed by the Eighth Air Force, that is to
say, formation pattern bombing by combat boxes of 18 aircraft at
20,000 feet and the actual bombing accuracy and distribution recorded
for the Eighth Air Force in 1943 and 44 will be used:

Average radial error of the center of the bombing pattern from the
aiming point: 875 feet.

Circular probable error of the center of the bombing pattern about
the aiming point: 820 feet.

Average dimensions of bomb pattern: 2400 feet by 2400 feet.

280

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 305 ---
APPENDIX

One combat box of 18 bombers carrying 1100—pound bombs could
deliver 108 bombs.

Considering first the powerhouse only (400 feet by 500 feet), a
combat box would provide a 75 percent probability of making at least
1 hit with 108 bombs.

If one combat wing (3 combat boxes or 54 bombers) is used
against one powerhouse target, the probability of at least one hit is
98.5 percent, and the probability of at least 2 hits is 84.5 percent.

If two combat wings (6 combat boxes or a total of 108 bombers)
are used against 1 target, then:

The probability of at least 1 hit is 99.99%.
The probability of at least 2 hits is 96.5%.
The probability of at least 3 hits is 89%.
The probability of at least 4 hits is 77%.
The probability of at least 5 hits is 54%.
The probability of at least 6 hits is 18%.

This is a conservative method of estimating probable hits.

The probability of making at least three hits with two combat
wings is thus about ninety percent.

The normal expectancy (fifty percent probability) of hits within
the powerhouse itself from one combat wing is eight.

Thus, if 2 combat wings (6 combat boxes or 108 bombers)
attacked each power generating station, they would have virtual
assurance of at least 1 hit in the powerhouse, a 96.5 percent probability
of knocking it out with 2 hits for several months and 89 percent
probability of 3 hits, knocking it out for 6 to 18 months.

As for the total target area: (1000 feet by 1000 feet)

The normal expectancy (fifty percent probability) of bombs within
the target if two combat wings are used is fifteen percent. This would
provide a normal expectancy of ninety-seven hits within the target
area. Actual experience showed that fifteen percent of all bombs
dropped by all methods (visual bombing and instrument bombing) by
the Eighth Air Force against the oil targets fell within the target area.

4. What is the number of successful attacks and what is the weight

281

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 306 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

of bombs required to knock out two-thirds of all German electric
power?

If 65 targets were attacked (56 generating stations and 9
transformers and switching stations), it would require 65 successful
missions by 2 combat wings each if it were considered desirable to seek
such a high probability of destruction at each target (90 percent). Since
each combat wing would utilize 54 sorties and deliver 178 tons of
bombs, this would involve a total of 23,140 tons of bombs delivered in
daylight precision bombing by 7,020 sorties.

But even such high probabilities of success as those chosen still
leave a chance that some targets will not be completely knocked out of
operation on the initial attacks.

To allow for re-attack of generating stations which continue to
provide some power and to allow for vicissitudes of weather, an
additional provision for attacking half the targets a second time might
be called for.

Under these circumstances, the weight of attack required to
provide ninety percent probability of successful destruction of each
target contributing to two-thirds of Germany’s electric power capaci-
ty, by normally successful daylight precision bombing, may be taken
as:

23,140 tons 7,020 sorties
11,570 tons 3,510 sorties
34,710 tons 10,530 sorties

Another method of computing the force required is somewhat
more conservative and calls for higher numbers of sorties. Attacking
generating stations in missions of 4 task forces of 2 wings each (108
bombers) against groups of 4 targets gives a 95 percent probability of
destroying at least 3 targets on each mission, which may be accepted
as practical certainty. Sixty-five targets would take 22 missions,
totaling 9,504 sorties and 31,363 tons of bombs. Allowance for
weather would raise this to 14,250 sorties and 47,844 tons of bombs, to
achieve 95 percent probability of success against all of the 65 targets,
with a 50 percent cushion for weather.

282

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 307 ---
APPENDIX

The task of knocking out the electric power system actually was
much less difficult than that of knocking out the synthetic oil
production—and keeping it out.

This tonnage (about 35,000 to 48,000 tons) is a small portion of
the total effort available in March, April, and May of 1944. During the
period March—May 1944, the U.S. Strategic Air Forces flew over
60,000 sorties and dropped 198,000 tons of bombs, of which only 6,080
tons were on oil targets. Thirty-five thousand tons (or 48,000 tons) is a
small portion of this effort. Obviously this is not the problem. In
comparison with the total sorties (over 50,000) and tonnage of bombs
actually dropped (150,000) by these air forces after Big Week in the
time period before May 15, these numbers of sorties (21 or 28 percent)
and tonnage (23.3 or 32 percent) of bombs for electric power is small.
After May 15, the entire effort of the strategic air forces should
properly have been directed to close preparation for the invasion itself.
The total tonnage dropped by U.S. air forces on all targets in May was
96,464 tons. Half of this would be 48,232 tons, more than enough to
have paralyzed German electric power. The RAF dropped 51,000 tons
in May. The combined total from both air forces in the last half of
May was 74,000 tons, which should have been ample to disrupt the
French railroads.

5. Were there enough days of visual bombing opportunity to have
accommodated the precision attacks against electric power targets
prior to the invasion?

Some guidance can be obtained by consideration of the number of
days in the spring of 1943 on which the Eighth Air Force was
launched against targets in which visual bombing conditions were
predicted.

In the three months, March through May 1943, there were 25
such missions, 19 of them between 1 March and 15 May. In 1944
about 150,000 tons of bombs were dropped in this time period.

It might be expected that in the corresponding two and a half
months of 1944 a similar number of daylight missions had been
possible.

Oil targets would have absorbed 4 of those days and 6,000 tons of

283

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 308 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

bombs, leaving 15 visual bombing days and 144,000 tons for targets
other than oil. However, the winter of 1944 was especially severe,
there was an unusual amount of overcast, weather forecasts were
unreliable, and weather distribution was seldom in the pattern desired.
To take care of the vicissitudes of weather, allowance has been made
for diversion of one half of the sorties away from the primary targets
to secondary targets. This would require re-attack of half of the
targets.

To repeat, it is most unlikely that the weather would have have
been so accommodating as to arrange for clear skies at the places
desired. But this allowance for inaccurate weather forecasting and for
unfavorable weather distribution provides a cushion that is ultra
conservative. The bombing effort could have accounted for the
destruction of two-thirds of Germany’s electric power capacity in two
and a half months even in the face of unusually bad weather.

The rate of repeat attacks for German electric power targets is
quite a different matter from that for synthetic oil plants. The latter
can be repaired by men with cutting torches, reinforcing plates, and
welding tools. But the boilers that nave been wrecked or the large
steam turbines, or the electric generators, or the high voltage
transformers and switches do not lend themselves to such treatment—
and there were no spares or reserves. A power plant or switching
station that is really heavily damaged is out of commission for a long
time.

If rail transportation in Germany had been established as a
secondary and alternate target system, a very large tonnage could still
have been directed that way. The missions which found the electric
power targets obscured could have been employed against transporta-
tion. Marshaling yards are sufficiently large to warrant attack in poor
visibility, or even by electronic bombing techniques. To be sure, the
large 1100—pound bombs with delay fuses would not have been of
optimum size for marshaling yards, but they would nevertheless have
been effective.

To utilize the available tonnage against electric power targets in
Germany it might have been necessary to shuttle strategic operations

284

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 309 ---
APPENDIX

from the Fifteenth Air Force in Italy to bases of the Eighth Air Force
in England—an operation similar to that employed earlier by the
Eighth in operations in the Mediterranean.

The tonnage actually dropped exclusive of the oil targets between
1 March and 15 May was adequate to have destroyed the German
electric power system before the invasion, and still have left 15 days in
May for attack of transportation in France to the extent of 48,000 tons
of direct attack on the railroads.

This takes no account of the bombing of RAF Bomber Command,
which contributed heavily to the “transportation plan” in France.

General Eisenhower was reported to have been exceedingly
pleased with the results of the 48,500 tons of bombs delivered by all
the Allied air forces against French rail transportation before the
invasion. This had risen to 84,000 tons by the end of June.

These analyses are based on the assumption that the grand
strategy had proceeded exactly as it actually did evolve. If, however,
the offensive operations in Italy had been reduced to probing actions
and the capture of Sardinia and Corsica after the surrender of Sicily,
there would have been no difficulty in concentrating the efforts of the
strategic air forces against their primary targets in Germany.

It appears that, even with the delay in build-up of the U.S.
Strategic Air Forces, it still would have been possible to wreck the
German electric power system before the invasion, without lessening
the air attacks which were actually carried out on the German Air
Force and the German oil industry. In this case, electric power would
have had to enjoy priority over transportation in France until the
middle of May 1944. Even then transportation would have absorbed a
very heavy tonnage as a secondary target system of U.S. daylight
operations and as a target of Bomber Command. If RAF Bomber
Command had also supplemented the attacks on electric power by
night attack on cities containing the largest generating capacities or
the most critical switching control centers, the total effect on electric
power would have been truly devastating.

There were enough fighters available by this time to provide
escort for these operations.

These calculations share a common error with AWPD-1 and

285

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 310 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

AWPD-42: they presume that it is necessary to destroy two thirds of
the generating capacity to cause the complete collapse of the entire
system. As indicated earlier, the collapse would have been self-induced
long before this number of plants had been knocked out.

Whether these operations could have been authorized and carried
out before the invasion in the face of Eisenhower’s vehement support
of the French Rail Transportation Plan, seems highly doubtful. But
they could certainly have been carried out shortly after the St. Lo
breakout, using less than one-fifth of the tonnage of the U.S. Strategic
Air Forces which were diverted from CBO targets, primarily to the
support of the ground campaigns.

286

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 311 ---
A6M2 Mode! 21
Zero-Sen
(Japanese)

ABC-1

Anglo-American
Conference

B-17
(American)

B-24
(American)

Glossary

Single-engine, single-seat, low-wing monoplane, built by Mitsubishi and
Nakajima. Used by army and navy. At Pearl Harbor the A6M2 Model
21 proved equal or superior to any Allied fighter. Armament, 2
fuselage-mounted machineguns and two 20-mm wing cannon, plus
two 132-Ib bombs. Maximum takeoff weight was 5,313 pounds;
highest speed, 316 miles per hour at 16,570 feet; service ceiling, 33,790
feet; and greatest combat range, 1,165 miles.

Short title for a series of British-American joint meetings and final
report. Starting January 29 and ending March 29, 1941, representa-
tives of the two military staffs discussed military and naval strategy,
joint operations, geographical responsibilities, force structure, com-
mand arrangements, and limited operational plans.

Held in Washington from May 12 to May 27, 1943. Attending were
President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, and their advisers,
including the Combined Chiefs of Staff. Conferees set May 1, 1944, as
the date for the Normandy Invasion; authorized seizure of Azores
unless Portugal granted use of bases on these islands; and agreed to
increase the quantity of gasoline flown over the Hump from India to
China.

Four-engine, midwing bomber, developed in 1930s by Boeing. Used
widely during World War II in Europe and the Mediterranean
theaters. Nine crewmembers. The F—model, used in the Schweinfurt-
Regensburg raids of August 1943, had maximum takeoff weight of
72,000 pounds; top speed of 311 miles; and a service ceiling of 35,000
feet. It carried a bombload of 20,800 pounds. Total produced for the
AAF, 1940-1945: 12,692.

Four-engine, midwing bomber, developed by Consolidated Vultee and
used in World War II. Eight to 10 crewmembers. Flew in all combat
theaters but was especially useful in the Pacific Theater on long-range
missions. Served as a bomber, tanker, and transport. The first model
used operationally by Army Air Forces bomber units was the B-24D

287

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 312 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

B-25
(American)

B-26
(American)

B-29
(American)

B-29 (Superdumbo)
(American)

B-32
(American)

B-36
(American)

Cairo Conferences

in 1942. The D had a maximum takeoff weight of 60,000 pounds; top
speed of 303 miles per hour at 25,000 feet; service ceiling of 32,000
feet; and a combat range of 2,850 miles. Later Ds carried a bombload
of 12,800 pounds. Total produced for the AAF, 1940-1945: 18,190.

Made by North American, the twin-engine, single-wing B-25 was one of
Army Air Forces’ best medium bombers of World War II. Three to 6
crewmembers. Bombload was 3,000 pounds. The B—model added a
power-operated turret, with a 2-gun retractable ventral turret replac-
ing the prone gunner’s position in the tail. The Doolittle raid to Japan
in April 1942 from the USS Hornet was flown in B—25Bs. The B-25B’s
maximum takeoff weight was 28,460 pounds; top speed, 300 miles per
hour at 15,000 feet; service ceiling, 23,500 feet; and combat range,
1,300 miles. Total produced for the AAF, 1940-1945: 9,816.

Built by Martin, the B-26 Marauder was a twin-engine, single-wing,
medium bomber. Three crewmembers. Sent to Australia in December
1941, B-26As saw action in the Pacific theaters from 1942-1945.
Beginning in 1942, they also operated from bases in Alaska and, in
November 1942, from North Africa. The B—model commenced
operations in Europe in May 1943 with Eighth Air Force. The Ninth
Air Force used B-26Bs very successfully in a tactical role, supporting
the invasion of Europe from the United Kingdom. The B-26B’s
maximum takeoff weight was 34,000 pounds; best speed, 317 miles per
hour at 14,500 feet; service ceiling, 23,500 feet; and combat range,
1,150 miles. Total produced for the AAF, 1940-1945: 5,157.

Built by Boeing and used predominantly in the Pacific, the B-29 featured
a pressurized cabin, highly advanced remote-control firing system, and
a bomb capacity of 20,000 pounds. Powered by 4 Wright R-3350
radial engines, the bomber had 10 crewmembers. The A-model had a
maximum takeoff weight of 141,100 pounds; top speed of 358 miles
per hour at 25,000 feet; a service ceiling of 31,850 feet; and a combat
range of 4,100 miles. Total produced for the AAF, 1940-1945: 3,763.

Used by the Navy as a rescue plane, the B-29 Superdumbo carried
inflatable lifeboats which were dropped from the air into the water.

Four engine, single-wing bomber, built by Consolidated. Ten crew-
members. Bombload, 20,000 pounds. Maximum takeoff weight was
111,500 pounds; top speed, 357 miles per hour at 30,000 feet; service
ceiling, 30,700 feet; and combat range, 2,500 miles. The B-32 lagged
far behind the B-29 in development. Only 15 saw limited combat in
the Pacific at the end of World War II.

Long-range bomber developed by Consolidated. Thought to have
potential value in bombing Japan, a contract for 100 B-36s was let in
1943. However, the war was over before the B-36 first flew on August
8, 1946. Normally carried 15 crewmen, including 4 relief men. The
B-36s maximum takeoff weight was 410,000 pounds; top speed, 411
miles per hour at 36,400 feet; service ceiling, 39,900 feet; and combat
range, 6,800 miles. The Strategic Air Command flew B-36s from 1947
to 1956.

First Cairo Conference was held November 22-26, 1943. President
Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, and Generalissimo Chiang Kai-

288

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 313 ---
Casablanca
Conference

CBO
CEP
combat box

comd
comdr

F-7
(American)

F-13A
(American)

FW-190
(German)

G4-Mi
(Japanese)

GLOSSARY

shek agreed to prosecute the war until Japan’s unconditional surren-
der. They agreed that Japan should be deprived of alli Pacific islands
acquired since 1914 and affirmed that Korea should become a free,
independent nation. Chiang Kai-shek agreed to build B-29 bases at
Chengtu, and Prime Minister Churchill agreed to build B-29 bases
near Calcutta, India. Admiral Nimitz was directed to capture the
Mariana Islands as bases for the B—29s.

At the Second Cairo Conference (December 4-6, 1943), Roosevelt,
Churchill, and President Ismet Inonu of Turkey discussed preliminar-
ies for Turkey’s entrance into the war. The U.S. strategic forces in
England and the Mediterrean were united under the command of
General Spaatz.

Held in French Morocco from January 14 to January 24, 1943. President
Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill considered Allied plans for
invading Sicily and the cross-channel invasion of Europe. They
reached a compromise on the invasion of Sicily and Italy, without
prejudicing the ultimate invasion of Europe from Great Britain.
President Roosevelt announced that the war would go on until the
unconditional surrender by the enemy.

Combined Bomber Offensive

circular error probable

A box formation used extensively in American strategic bombing tactics
in World War II. The term was especially applied to B~17 formations.

command

commander

Single-seat, twin-engine U.S. Navy fighter used in World War II. It flew
from Navy aircraft carriers. Built by Grumman, the F-7 had four
.50-caliber guns in the nose and four 20-mm cannons in the wings.
Could carry two 1,000-pound bombs, or 6 rockets, or a standard Navy
torpedo. The F-7/F-3 was the photoreconnaissance version with
cameras installed aft in the fuselage. The F-7’s maximum takeoff
weight was 25,720 pounds; top speed, 435 miles per hour at 22,200
feet; service ceiling, 40,700 feet; and combat range, 1,200 miles.

Photoreconnaissance version of the B-29A.

Single-engine, single-seat, monoplane interceptor. Built by Focke-Wulf,
its basic airframe permitted adaption to a close-support fighter,
fighter-bomber, and fighter-dive-bomber. This versatile and highly
efficient aircraft served from late 1940 to the end of the war in Europe.
Armament of the Fw-190F-3 consisted of two 7.9-mm fuselage-
mounted machineguns, and two 20-mm cannon in the wings. Typical
bombload comprised a single 550-pound bomb under the fuselage and
four 110-pound bombs under the wings. Maximum takeoff weight was
10,850 pounds; top speed, 394 miles per hour at 18,000 feet; service
ceiling, 34,780 feet; and combat range, 500 miles.

Twin-engine, single-wing bomber, developed by Mitsubishi. Called
“Betty” by the Allies, it served throughout the Pacific during World

289

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 314 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Gee

GHQ

He-111
(German)

Hump

Iceberg

initial point

Ju-88
(German)

Ki-43-la
(Japanese)

Ki-45-Kai-C
(Japanese)

War II. Maximum takeoff weight, 26,645 pounds. Top speed, 265
miles per hour at 13,780 feet. Combat range, 3,132 miles, was achieved
by putting 1,100 gallons of fuel into the wings and furnishing no armor
protection. Armament consisted of a 20-mm cannon in tail and single
flexible guns in nose, rear, and belly positions. Due to heavy combat
losses, later models afforded some protection for crew and fuel.

A medium-distance radionavigation system or aid. An aircraft’s position
was determined by an air traffic controller viewing a scope. The
system measured the difference between the time of arrival of
synchronized pulses broadcast by a master and two slave stations. One
of the broadcast stations was fixed on the aircraft. Developed by the
British before World War II.

General Headquarters

All-metal, single-wing, twin-engine, medium bomber, built by Heinkel.
Most widely used and versatile version was the He-111H-6. Five or 6
crewmembers. Bombload, 4,410 pounds. Performed a variety of roles
besides that of medium bomber. For example, it became a first-rate
torpedo bomber, carrying 2 of these weapons. Maximum takeoff
weight was 27,400 pounds; top speed, 258 miles per hour at 16,400
feet; service ceiling, 25,500 feet; and combat range, 760 miles.

An eastern range of the Himalaya Mountains lying between China and
India and Burma. Army Air Forces flew thousands of air transport
missions “Over the Hump” from India to China in World War II.

Operation Iceberg was the Allied combined naval-land amphibious
offensive in World War II to capture Okinawa, the largest island of the
Ryukyu Islands. The objective was to take Okinawa in order to
establish air bases for conducting the air war against Japan.

A point on the ground, indentified visually or by electronic means, over
which an aircraft begins a bomb run or a run over a drop zone.

Twin-engine, single-wing aircraft, developed by Junkers. Four crewmen.
Used in various modifications: horizontal bomber, dive bomber,
torpedo bomber, day or night fighter, or reconnaissance aircraft. The
Ju-88G—7 night fighter was fitted with 4 forward-firing 20-mm
cannons, 1 rear-firing 13-mm machinegun, and a pair of cannons
firing obliquely upward. Maximum takeoff weight was 32,250; top
speed, 389 miles per hour at 29,800 feet; and combat range, 1,380
miles.

Single-seat, one-engine monoplane, developed by Nakajima. Known as
“Oscar” to the Allies, this fighter and subsequent models performed
widely in the Pacific as interceptors and long-range escorts. The
Ki-43-la had only a pair of 7.7-mm machineguns mounted in the
upper-wing. Heavier guns were installed in later models. Maximum
takeoff was 5,695 pounds; top speed, 308 miles per hour at 13,120 feet;
service ceiling, 38,500 feet; and combat range, 745 miles.

Manufactured by Kawasaki, this twin-engine, single-wing, day/night
fighter carried a crew of 2. Dubbed “Nick” by the Allies. Armament

290

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 315 ---
Ki-61-Ia
(Japanese)

Ki-84-Ia
(Japanese)

Ki-102B
(Japanese)

kamikaze

Lancaster Mk.1

(British)

GLOSSARY

comprised a single 37-mm gun forward, twin fixed 20-mm guns
amidships (firing forward and upward), and on some aircraft a small
searchlight in the nose. Maximum takeoff weight was 12,125 pounds;
top speed, 336 miles per hour at 19,685 feet; service ceiling, 32,808
feet; and combat range, 746 miles. Nick was active in the southern
battle areas of the Pacific war, proving a perfect aircraft for escort and
patrol between the widely dispersed islands. Later, it assumed night
defense of Japanese cities against B-29 strikes.

Single-wing, one-seat, single-engine, fighter-interceptor built by Kawasa-

ki. Nicknamed ‘‘Tony” by the Allies, it served in virtually every
theater of the Pacific, and at one time formed a major part of Japan’s
home fighter force. Armament, 2 fuselage 7.7-mm guns and 2 wing-
mounted 12.7-mm guns (later models strengthened this armament).
Maximum takeoff weight was 7,650 pounds; top speed, 348 miles per
hour at 16,404 feet; service ceiling, 32,808 feet; combat range, 1,118
miles. Tony was one of the best interceptors against the B-29s. Pilots
often made “kills” by ramming the target rather than using their guns.

Known to the Allies as “Frank,” this one-seat, single-engine, Nakajima

aircraft served as a day/night fighter, dive bomber, and ground
support fighter. Armament, a pair of 20-mm wing cannon and twin
12.7-mm guns in the upper engine cowling. It could carry two
550-pound bombs under its wings. Maximum takeoff weight was
8,267 pounds; highest speed, 388 miles per hour at 19,685 feet; service
ceiling, 34,450 feet; and combat range, 1,025 miles.

Twin-engine, two-seat, attack fighter, developed by Kawasaki. Known as

“Randy” by the Allies. It resembled the Ki-45~Kai-C (‘Nick‘), but
had better performance. In its nose were two 20-mm cannon. The
wings had 57-mm cannons (with 150 shells and a firing rate of 80
rounds per minute). A 12.7-mm machinegun in the rear cockpit fired
obliquely upward to the rear. Two 550-pound bombs could be carried
under the wings. Maximum takeoff weight was 16,094 pounds; top
speed, 360 miles per hour at 19,685 feet; service ceiling, 32,808 feet;
and combat range was 1,243 miles.

Japanese for “divine wind.” A tactic used by certain Japanese pilots

during World War II, in which they flew their airplanes as missiles
against Allied targets. This tactic was an act of self-destruction by the
pilots and desperation by Japanese military leaders.

Built by Avro, the 4~engine, single-wing Lancaster was the backbone of

RAF Bomber Command’s offensive against Germany from 1943 to
1945. Crew of 7. It was the most famous and most successful heavy
strategic night bomber used over Europe. The maximum bombload,
14,000 pounds, consisted of a wide range of high-explosive and
incendiary weapons. Maximum takeoff weight was 63,000 pounds; top
speed, 281 miles per hour at 18,500 feet; service ceiling, 23,500 feet;
and combat range, 2,695 miles. Throughout the war, the MK.1 model
and later versions of the Lancaster delivered 608,612 tons of bombs in
156,000 sorties against Germany and Italy.

291

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 316 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Me-109 (Bf—109)
(German)

Matterhorn

Norden bombsight

Oboe

Overlord

P-38
(American)

P-47
(American)

P-51
(American)

Single-engine, single-seat, low-wing fighter, developed by Messerschmitt.
Used in the Battle of Britain and throughout the war. One of the finest
models was the Me-109F-3. Its armament consisted of one 15-mm
cannon and two 7.9-mm machineguns. Maximum takeoff weight was
6,054 pounds; top speed, 390 miles per hour at 22,000 feet; service
ceiling, 37,000 feet; and combat range, 440 miles.

Strategic air operation approved by President Roosevelt in November
1943 for the bombing of Japan by B-29s flying from China. The
bombers were based in India, but were staged through Chengtu, China
before striking Japan.

A gyroscopically stabilized synchronizing bombsight used mainly for
strategic bombing in World War II. Utilizing preset data and manual
operation by the bombardier, the Norden bombsight computed the
correct dropping angle and, in connection with an automatic pilot or
pilot direction indicator, determined the proper course for the aircraft
to the target.

Radar navigation and blind-bombing system using two ground stations
measuring distance to a radar beacon on the aircraft.

Overall plan for invasion of Western Europe in 1944.

Two-engine, single-seat, single-wing fighter with twin booms. Built by
Lockheed, the P-38 was popularly called “Lightning.” One of the
best-known World War II fighters, it served in a variety of roles. Extra
fuel tanks and twin engines made the Lightning an excellent escort for
deep-penetration raids of B—17s and B—24s over Europe and for strike
missions in the Southwest Pacific. Armament of the L-model
consisted of two .50-inch machineguns and two 1,600-pound bombs.
Maximum takeoff weight was 21,600 pounds; highest speed, 414 miles
per hour at 25,000 feet; service ceiling, 44,000 feet; and combat range,
450 miles. Total production for the AAF, 1940-1945: 9,536.

Powered by a single radial engine, the single-seat P-47 was developed by
Republic and used in World War II as a fighter and fighter-bomber.
The D-model’s armament comprised eight .50-caliber machineguns
and one 500-pound bomb. Affectionately known as the “Jug,” the
P-47 was reputed to be the toughest fighter of the war, able to absorb
tremendous punishment. Maximum takeoff weight was 19,400
pounds; top speed, 428 miles per hour at 30,000 feet; service ceiling,
42,000 feet; and combat range, 475 miles. Total production for the
AAF, 1940-1945: 15,585.

Single-seat, low-wing monoplane, powered by a single liquid-cooled
engine. Built by North American and widely used in World War II. It
escorted B-17s and B-24s on bombing missions over Germany. The
D-model’s armament consisted of six .50-caliber machineguns and
two 1,000-pound bombs. Maximum takeoff weight was 11,600
pounds; top speed, 437 miles per hour at 25,000 feet; service ceiling,
41,900 feet; and combat range, 950 miles. Redesignated the F-51, the

292

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 317 ---
PB-2
(American)

pathfinder

Potsdam
Conference

Quadrant
Quebec Conference

RAF
Reno IV

rope

San Antonio
I and II

Sextant

SHAEF

skip bombing

SLU
Stirling Mk-I
(British)

GLOSSARY

“Mustang” served in the Korean War. Total production for the AAF,
1940-1945: 14,501.

Developed by Consolidated, the PB-2 was a single-engine, two-seat,
monoplane fighter. The A-model carried 2 fixed forward-firing guns
and a single .30-inch gun on a flexible mount in the rear cockpit.
Maximum takeoff weight was 5,643 pounds; top speed, 274 miles per
hour at 25,000 feet; service ceiling, 28,000 feet; and combat tange, 508
miles.

An aircraft with a specially trained crew, carrying dropping zone/
landing zone marking teams, target markers, or navigational aids. It
preceded the main force to the dropping zone/landing zone, or target.

Held from July 17 to August 2, 1945. Attended by President Truman,
Prime Minister Churchill, Premier Joseph Stalin, and other officials.
Clement R. Atlee, new British Prime Minister, joined the conference
on July 29. Conferees issued “unconditional surrender” ultimatum
(July 26) to Japan; considered treatment of Germany during occupa-
tion and control period; and provided for the trial of war criminals by
an International Military Tribunal which was established soon after
the conference.

See Quebec Conference.

Convened from August 11 to 24, 1943. President Roosevelt and Prime
Minister Churchill reaffirmed target date for Normandy Invasion.
Roosevelt and Churchill agreed to accelerate military operations in
Far East, especially in Burma; created a Southeast Asia Command
with Adm. Lord Louis Mountbatten as Supreme Allied Commander;
and acknowledged that the Battle of the Atlantic against the U-boat
had turned in favor of the Allies.

Royal Air Force

An Allied naval-land-air operation to push along the northern coast of
New Guinea into Mindanao, Philippine Islands.

Narrow metallic strips of various lengths which, when dropped from
aircraft, created false signals on enemy radarscopes.

First planned strategic air strikes against Japan (Nakajima aircraft
factory, near Tokyo urban areas).

See Cairo Conferences.

Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Forces

Bombing tactic accomplished by releasing one or more bombs from a
plane flying at low altitude, so that the bombs glance off of the surface
of the water or ground and strike the target.

special liaison unit

Four-engine monoplane developed by Short. The bomb bay of this heavy
strategic bomber held a maximum load of 14,000 pounds that could be
carried 590 miles. With the load reduced to 3,500 pounds, the
bomber’s range was 2,010 miles. Since the bomb bay was split into
sections, the heaviest bomb that could be accommodated was a 4,000
pounder. This limited the Stirling’s effectiveness. Maximum takeoff

293

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 318 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Torch
Trident

Tripartite Pact

Ultra

USSBS

weight was 59,400 pounds; top speed, 260 miles per hour; and combat
range, 2,330 miles. Carrying a crew of 7 or 8, the Stirling Mk-III
featured more powerful engines and an improved dorsal gun turret.

Operation code name for the Allied invasion of North Africa, beginning
on November 8, 1942. It was the first major amphibious operation of
World War II in the European Theater.

See Anglo-American Conference.

German-Italian-Japanese ten-year military-economic alliance signed at
Berlin on September 27, 1940. It created the Axis powers of World
War IL.

During World War II the Germans used an encryption machine called
Enigma. The British, assisted by the Polish and French, broke the
code for Enigma and extracted intelligence data which they labeled
Top Secret Ultra. This Ultra intelligence data went to only a very few
political leaders and military commanders. For the greater part of the
war, German Enigma messages were systematically, regularly, and
extensively deciphered.

United States Strategic Bombing Survey. A survey of bomb damage done
by Allied strategic bombing forces during World War II, covering
both primary and secondary damage in the European and Pacific
Theaters of Operation. Term also refers to the board that made this
survey.

German robot flying bomb with a pulse jet engine that allowed it to be
launched form the Continent at targets in England. Called the
“FZG-76” by the Germans and the “buzz bomb” by the British. Used
in World War II.

294

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 319 ---
Bibliography

For more than fifty years I have studied the theories, applications,
and debates on strategic air warfare. These studies, rooted in personal
commitments and experiences, are the basis of this memoir. Certain
books and official histories, however, were of great assistance in
recalling the context, circumstances, and specific dates in a war fought
four decades ago. Two sets of official analytical works were invaluable:
Wesley F. Craven and James L. Cate, editors, The Army Air Forces in
World War II, 7 volumes (Chicago, 1948-1958), Reprint Edition,
(Washington: 1984); and United States Strategic Bombing Survey:
European Survey, 208 Reports (Washington: September—October
1945), and Pacific Survey, 108 Reports (Washington: June-July 1946).
In addition, for this memoir I drew upon my two earlier published
works: The Air Plan That Defeated Hitler (Atlanta, Ga: 1972) and
Strategic Air War Against Japan (Maxwell Air Force Base: 1980).
Other books and periodicals which were of assistance are cited below.

Additional Works

Coffey, Thomas M. Decision Over Schweinfurt: The U.S. Eighth Air
Force Battle for Daylight Bombing. New York: David McKay Co,
Inc, 1977.

Douhet, Giulio. The Command of the Air. New Imprint. Washington:
Office of Air Force History, 1983.

Futrell, Robert F. Ideas, Concepts, Doctrine: A History of Basic

295

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 320 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Thinking in the United States Air Force, 1907-1964. Maxwell Air
Force Base, Ala: Air University, 1974.

Hurley, Alfred F. Billy Mitchell: Crusader for Air Power. 2d ed.
Bloomington, Ind: Indiana University Press, 1975.

IMPACT: The Army Air Forces’ “Confidential” Picture History of
World War II. 8 vols. New York: James Parton & Co, Inc, 1980.

Liddell Hart, Basil H. Paris, or the Future of War. New York: E. P.
Dutton and Company, 1925.

Sallagar, Frederick M. Lessons from an Aerial Mining Campaign
(Operation Starvation). R-1322—-PR. Santa Monica: The RAND
Corporation, April 1974.

Slessor, Sir John C. The Central Blue: Autobiography of Sir John
Slessor, Marshal of the RAF. New York: Frederick A. Praeger,
1957.

Speer, Albert. Inside the Third Reich: Memoirs. New York: The
Macmillian Co, 1970.

Winterbotham, Frederick W. The Ultra Secret. New York: Harper &
Row, 1974.

296

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 321 ---
Index

Adams, Lt. Col. Alan F.: 221
Agan, Jr., Lt. Col. Arthur C. “Sailor”: 74
Air Corps Tactical School: 6-7, 11-16, 19, 21,
22, 26, 62, 103, 111, 112, 113, 217,
263, 265, 269
Air Estimate of the Situation for Strategic Air
Warfare: 16
Air Forces (named, numbered)
Europe: Eighth Air Force (England): 55,
61-63, 69, 80, 81, 89, 93, 94,
95, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102,
105, 110, 114, 131, 132, 137,
156, 170, 198, 215, 227, 239,
252, 253, 254, 280, 281, 283,
285
VIII Bomber Command:
61-62, 64, 85
Ninth Air Force: 98, 99,
101, 107, 110, 114
Twelfth Air Force: 92-93
Fifteenth Air Force: 92-93,
95, 96, 98, 100, 101, 102,
105, 114, 138, 170, 253, 254,
285
Mediterranean Allied Air
Forces: 93, 114
91st Bomb Group: 108
Pacific: Fourteenth Air Force: 154, 209,
213
Twentieth Air Force: 157,
159, 160-61, 162, 163, 164,
166, 167, 170, 177, 178, 183,
184, 190, 198, 205, 208, 210,
211, 212, 214, 216, 218, 227,
229, 233, 234, 244, 245, 253,
254
XX Bomber Command:
165-166, 167, 205, 207, 209,
210, 211, 213, 254, 256

XXI Bomber Command:
165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 171,
175, 176, 177, 178, 181, 183,
184, 186, 189, 192, 197, 198,
199, 201, 203, 207, 208, 211,
212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217,
220, 221, 224, 227, 232, 244,
251, 254, 256
Air War Plans Division (AWPD-1): 25,
37-38, 41, 51, 52, 58, 59, 62, 63,
103, 110, 112-113, 117, 125, 132,
133, 198, 248, 261, 263, 265, 269,
285
(AWPD-42): 57-59, 63n, 68, 72,
73, 75, 103, 110, 117, 125, 132,
133, 142, 144, 238, 248, 261, 265,
286
Alexander, Henry C.: 116
Allied Expeditionary Forces: 93
American airmen morale: 83-85
American-British Conference (ABC Confer-
ences—ABC-1): 24, 27-28, 29,

31-32, 72

Anderson, Brig. Gen. Frederick L.: 74, 85, 86,
91, 93, 99

Andrews, Lt. Gen. Frank M.: 17, 67, 76, 77,
81, 148

Armstrong, Brig. Gen. Frank A.: 239, 244

Army Air Forces in World War IT: 229

Arnold, Maj. Gen. Henry H. “Hap”: 20-21,
30, 38, 40, 45, 56, 60, 63-64, 66,
68, 69, 74, 77, 78, 91, 92, 93, 105,
106, 107, 111, 113, 115-116, 136,
137, 140, 141, 142, 144, 146, 147,
151-152, 154, 157, 158, 159, 160,
161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167, 172,
179, 180, 181, 183, 191, 199, 200,
202, 207, 208, 209, 212, 213, 217,
218, 228, 251, 252-53, 254

297

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 322 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Atom bomb: 249, 252, 253, 264, 266, 267, 271
Australian-British-Dutch-American Com-
mand: 158

Baker Board: 5-6, 16, 17

Ball, George W.: 116

Balmer, Lt. Col. Jesmond D.: 46
Battle of Britain: 27, 50, 61

Bellairs, Rear Adm. Roger M.: 27
Bieri, Rear Adm. Bernhard H.: 136
Bowman, Henry L.: 116

Bradley, Gen. Omar N.: 121-22
Bratton, Capt. Andral: 20

Brentnall, Col. Samuel R.: 161
Brereton, Lt. Gen. Lewis H.: 104
British Chiefs of Staff Committee: 93
British Joint Plans Committee: 44
Brooke, Sir Alan F.: 44

Bryden, Maj. Gen. William: 20-21
Bufton, Air Commodore Sidney O.: 74
Burgess, Col. Woodbury M.: 161

Cabell, Col. Charles P.: 74, 99

Cabot, Charles C.: 116

Caproni, Count Giovanni: 2, 3, 4, 6

Carl, Dr.: 278-79

Carmichael, Col. Richard H.: 174

Carpenter, Lt. Col. John W.: 161

Casablanca Conference: 69, 72, 81, 142, 263

“Casablanca Directive”: 72-73, 74, 77-78, 80,
117

Cate, James L.: 229

Catton, Jack J.: 172

Central Pacific Area Command: 172

Chaney, Maj. Gen. James E.: 64

Chennault, Brig. Gen. Claire L.: 142, 154, 209,
210, 211

Chiang Kai-shek: 142, 146, 147, 154

China-Burma-India Theater: 154, 166, 167,
205, 234

Churchill, Prime Minister Winston: 28, 38, 44,
45, 51, 56, 60, 61, 69, 70, 77, 117,
142, 150, 249, 261, 272

Combined Bomber Offensive (CBO): 72, 77,
80, 85, 92-93, 95, 101, 110, 111,
112, 131, 160, 260, 261, 286
“Pointblank” (Code name):
80-81, 94, 95, 97

Combined Chiefs of Staff: 92, 262-63

Combined Logistic Committee: 146, 152

Combs, Col. Cecil E.: 160, 161, 165-66, 173,
214, 253

Command of the Air, The: 3

Committee of Operations Analysts: 143-44,

298

147, 161, 167, 217, 218, 219, 260,
263, 277

Consolidated Aircraft Company: 14

Craig, Col. Howard A.: 45

Craven, Wesley F.: 229

Curry, John F.: 7, 9

Danckwerts, Rear Adm. Victor H.: 27

Devers, Lt. Gen. Jacob L.: 81, 109

D’Olier, Franklin: 116

Doolittle, Maj. Gen. James H.: 6, 92, 93, 114,
253, 254

Doolittle raid: 179

Douhet, Lt. Col. Guilio: 3, 4, 6, 12, 13, 22

Eaker, Maj. Gen. Ira C.: 21, 61, 63, 64, 65, 67,
69-71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 80, 81,
85, 86, 91, 93, 96, 97, 104, 105,
109, 114, 251

Eastern Front: 122, 270

Eisenhower, Maj. Gen. Dwight D.: 57, 64-65,
68, 81, 92, 93, 97, 102, 103, 104,
105, 106, 107, 110, 111, 114, 133,
250, 262, 263, 285, 286

Embick, Lt. Gen. Stanley D.: 28

Emperor Hirohito: 53

European Theater of Operations: 57

Fairchild, Maj. Gen. Muir “Santy”: 7, 8, 40,
68, 115, 136, 140, 151, 158

Far East War Plans Group: 138, 139

Frank, Maj. Gen. Walter H. “Tony”: 173

Futrell, Dr. Robert Frank: 225

Galbraith, John Kenneth: 116, 126

Gardner, Brig. Gen. Grandison: 111

Garretson, Col. Ralph B.: 221

Gates, Col. Byron E.: 68

General Headquarters Air Force (GHQ Air
Force): 17, 81, 148, 160

George, Lt. Col. Harold Lee: 7, 8, 25, 30, 31,
45, 66, 112, 113, 263

German electric power system as target:
275-286

Gerow, Brig. Gen. Leonard T.: 28, 31

Ghormley, Rear Adm. Robert L.: 27

Giles, Lt. Gen. Barney M.: 234, 238, 254

Grant, Maj. Gen. David N. W.: 161

Guderian, Gen. Heinz: 49

Hale, Maj. Gen. Willis H.: 208

Halsey, Adm. William F. “Bull”: 179

Handy, Maj. Gen. Thomas T.: 45, 158

Hansell, Brig. Gen. Haywood S.: 46, 66, 67,
74, 88, 136-138, 139, 140, 148,

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 323 ---
151, 156, 157, 160, 162-64, 165,
167, 170, 172, 197, 198-204,
207-208, 211, 212, 213-15, 216,
217-18, 220, 221-224, 227, 228,
230, 232, 275n

Hardy, Col. John S.: 74

Harmon, Lt. Gen. Millard F.: 172, 182, 207,
208n, 234

Harriman, W. Averell: 40

Harris, Air Marshal Sir Arthur “Bomber”: 64,
67, 69, 97, 104, 105, 107

Hatch, Maj. D. P.: 221

Hitler, Adolph: 27, 30, 53, 268

Hoover, Vice Adm. John: 173, 174, 179, 207,
208

Hughes, Maj. Richard: 74

“Hump”: 144, 146, 209, 211

Ideas, Concepts, Doctrine: A History of Basic
Thinking in the U.S. Air Force,
1907-1964: 225

Irvine, Col. Clarence S.: 227

Ismay, Lt. Gen. Sir Hastings L.: 45

Joint Army and Navy Board: 29-30, 40, 52

Joint Intelligence Committee: 44, 48, 146

Joint Plans Committee: 53, 98, 136, 137, 138,
139, 152, 161

Joint Strategic Committee: 55

Joint Target Group: 229, 238

Joint War Plans Committee: 147, 159, 161,
215

Joint War Plans Review Board: 138, 139

Kenney, Lt. Gen. George C.: 148-149, 154,
165, 183

King, Adm. Ernest J.: 61, 116, 136, 157-158,
159, 173, 251, 252

Kirk, Capt. Alan G.: 27

Knerr, Maj. Gen. Hugh J.: 93

Knudsen, William S.: 40

Kuter, Maj. Gen. Lawrence S.: 29, 31, 136,
140, 146, 151, 158, 161, 173, 181,
232

Leahy, Adm. William D.: 45, 136, 251-252
Leigh-Mallory, Air Chief Marshal Sir Traf-
ford L.: 93, 104, 105, 107, 110, 111
LeMay, Maj. Gen. Curtis E.: 86, 88, 199, 200,
204, 207, 209, 210-211, 213, 215,
218, 227-228, 230, 231, 232-233,
238, 241, 251, 252, 253, 254
Lessons From an Aerial Mining Campaign

INDEX

(Operation Starvation): 198,
200-201, 219-220

Liddel Hart, Capt. B. H.: 3

Likert, Rensis: 116

Litzenberg, Jr., Maj. Homer L.: 46

Lovett, Robert A.: 38

Lowe, Dr. James T.: 23

McClelland, Brig. Gen. Harold M.: 161, 162

McCormick, Brig. Gen. John H.: 161

McCoy, John: 258

McGhee, Commander George C.: 197, 214

McKee, Col. William F.: 161

McNamee, Frank A.: 116

McNarney, Lt. Gen. Joseph T.: 28, 109

MacArthur, Gen. Douglas: 148, 149-150, 151,
152, 154, 165, 166, 249-251

Maddocks, Col. Ray T.: 46, 47

Marshall, Gen. George C.: 21, 29-30, 31, 32,
38, 40, 45, 48, 60, 81, 107, 136,
140, 148, 149-150, 152, 158, 159,
172, 219, 251, 252

Mediterranean Theater: 83, 262

Miles, Brig. Gen. Sherman: 20-21, 28

Milne, 2nd Lt. Ray L.; 215

Mitchell, Brig. Gen. William “Billy”: 3, 4, 5,
6, 9, 12, 62

Montgomery, Col. John B.: 191, 214, 221

Morley, Group Capt. Arthur: 74

Morris, Maj. Gen. Edwin L.: 27

Moss, Maj. Malcolm: 23

Mountbatten, Adm. Lord Louis: 153-154

Mussolini, Benito: 27

Nimitz, Adm. Chester W.: 148, 150, 151, 152,
154, 166, 172, 173, 179, 180, 183,
199, 200, 207

Nitze, Paul: 116

Norstad, Brig. Gen. Lauris “Larry”: 167, 208,
217, 218, 228

Normandy invasion (Overlord): 95, 103-107,
110, 117, 122, 150, 198, 260, 261,
262, 270

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO):
273

O’Donnell, Jr., Brig. Gen. Emmett “Rosey”:
180, 181, 183-184, 185, 205

Okinawa invasion (Operation Iceberg): 232

Olds, Robert: 7, 8

Operation Torch: 198

Palmerston, Lord Henry: 162
Park, Air Vice Marshal Keith R.: 93

299

File: --- THE_Strategic_Air_War_Hansell.pdf --- Page 324 ---
STRATEGIC AIR WAR

Parton, Capt. James: 70

Partridge, Col. Earle E. “Pat”: 57

Pearl Harbor: 40, 41, 43, 44, 51, 63

Peirse, Air Chief Marshal Richard E. C.: 154

Perera, Col. Guido R.: 161

Pershing, Gen. John J.: 5, 150

Pfeiffer, Col. Omar T.: 28

Ploesti: 24, 35

Portal, Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles F. A.:
44, 65, 74, 77-78, 80, 91-92, 105,
107, 137, 160

Potsdam Conference: 249, 252, 254, 266

Pound, Sir Dudley: 44

Project Matterhorn: 144, 146-147, 153, 154,
205

Quadrant Conference (Quebec): 91, 93,
135-136, 142, 153

Radar bombsight (AN/APQ-7): 211-212,
228, 232, 234, 241, 245, 264, 269

Rainbow No. 5: 29, 31

Ramey, Brig. Gen. Roger M.: 183, 192, 214,
229

Ramsey, Capt. DeWitt C.: 28

Read, Capt. Oliver M.: 46, 47

Reno IV: 151

Roberts, Brig. Gen. Frank N.: 136, 137

Rodgers, Capt. Bertram: 46

Roosevelt, President Franklin D.: 25-26, 28,
38, 40, 44, 45, 51, 56, 61, 69, 77,
117, 136, 142, 150, 154, 261

Rosenblatt, Col. Sol: 161, 162, 163

Royal Air Force (RAF) Bomber Command:
80, 96, 99-100, 112, 285

Russell, Robert P.: 116

Ryan, Col. Llewellyn O.: 161

Sallagar, Dr. Frederick M.: 198, 200-201, 219

San Antonio I, II: 180-189

Saunders, Brig. Gen. La Verne G. “Blondie”:
205, 207

Scanlon, Brig. Gen. Martin F.: 66

Schneider, Maj. Max F.: 31, 161

Stimson, Henry L.: 30, 40, 109, 116, 252

Strategic Air Intelligence Section: 22, 53, 74,
238

Strategic Survey Committee: 68 (see also Joint
Strategic Committee)

Stratemeyer, Maj. Gen. George E.: 66, 154

Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary
Forces (SHAEF): 93, 104
Sutherland, Lt. Gen. Richard K.: 151

Tedder, Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur: 104,
105

Terry, Col. Seth S.: 195, 221

“Tokyo Rose”: 174

Trenchard, Maj. Gen. Hugh M.: 2, 4

Trident meeting: 78, 80, 81

Tripartite Pact: 27

Truman, President Harry S.: 244, 249, 251,
252, 253, 266

Turner, Rear Adm. Richmond K.: 27, 45

Twining, Maj. Gen. Nathan F.: 93, 244, 253,
254

Ultra Secret: 180, 181, 203-204

US. Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee: 45, 56

U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey (USSBS): 101,
114, 116-117, 119, 121-122,
125-126, 129-130, 168, 212-213,
217, 224, 225, 229, 238, 245,
248-249, 252, 260, 266-267,
277-278, 279
German Electric Utilities subcom-
mittee report: 279-280
Report on Japanese War Produc-
tion Industries: 245-248

V-1 missile: 110-111
Vanaman, Lt. Col. Arthur W.: 66
“Victory Program”: 40-41, 50, 52, 63

Walker, Lt. Col. Kenneth N.: 7, 25, 31, 103

War Dept. General Staff (WDGS): 21

Watson, Maj. Gen. Edwin M. “Pa”: 136

Wavell, Gen. Archibald P.: 158

Wedemeyer, Lt. Col. Albert C.: 46, 47, 53, 56,
209, 210, 211, 213

White, Maj. Thomas D.: 21, 181

Williams, Brig. Gen. Robert B.: 86

Wilson, Jr., Col. Albert T.: 221

Wilson, Donald: 7, 8

Winterbotham, Group Capt. Frederick W.:
181, 203 (see also Ultra Secret)

Wolfe, Brig. Gen. Kenneth B.: 144, 165, 166,
205, 207, 209

Wolfinbarger, Col. Willard R.: 140

Wray, Col. Stanley T.: 66

Wright, Theodore P.: 116

300

%* U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE :

1986 0 - 168-876

